---
cssclass: research-note
type: "encyclopediaArticle"
title: "Motivation"
date: 2023-07-10
citekey: Motivation2023
---
[1]

“Motivation,” _Wikipedia_. 10 Juli 2023. Diakses: 15 Juli 2023. [Daring]. Tersedia pada: [https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Motivation&oldid=1164722686](https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Motivation&oldid=1164722686)
[online](http://zotero.org/users/local/gmKBCdbk/items/DK7296S6) [local](zotero://select/library/items/DK7296S6)
 

Motivation is why a behavior start, resume, or stop at certain moment. 

Another point of view is through flexibility that reflected in changing behavior through new experience. Rat through maze is more flexible, and can be said has motivational states, than flies. Although still need to consider limitation, like a paralyzed person that can have motivational states without displaying flexibility. So flexibility is suffice but isn't essential to indicate motivation.

Every Agent have motivational states, with various strength, that drives them through goal oriented behavior. The main state is desires, but there is also beliefs and intentions. Multiple states can conflicting and the strongest will be manifesting into behavior. So behavior doesn't necessarily reflect existing motivations, just the strongest.

Theories from Humean Tradition, denies states other than desire can motivate. With desire strength, form strongest desire thesis. Where various weak desire may defeat the strongest desire. Objection raised with relationship of the Agent themselves that have freewill and the Agent themselves that decide the action. Other is sense of duty that may conflicting with strongest desire or intention that based on commitment. Though intention might be combined with the strongest desire, may materialized with the difference of animal and human.

The categorization of Agent may be another point of discussion. Either continuity of human and animal, or difference of specific reason and commit through intention than just following strongest desire.

Relation between motivation and behavior can be defined as core causal or just one explanation aspect. 

The content of motivational states bring various theories that categorically named [[Motivation - Content Theories]]. Theories that posit humans have needs to drives motivation with various priorities from basic to higher needs. To define using internal force can bring complexities to measure. The content of motivation: things that motivate is the first of motivation reseach. Since these theories focus on goals category, these theories related to Need Theories. This include Abraham Maslow's [[Hierarchy Of Needs]] and Herzberg's [[Two-Factor Theory]]. 

[[Hierarchy Of Needs]] based on human needs. That human is inherently good and have great potential through inner drive. Emphasizing basic need to be met before the next needs and finally on self actualization. Basic Physiological Needs like food and shelter. Safety Needs like protection. Love or Belonging Needs like giving and receiving affection. Esteem Needs like competence and control in personal life. Depriving basic and lower needs could lead to depression or lower self esteem, and with emotional support can lead to decreased emotional challenges. According to Maslow people motivated with unsatisfied needs. And the top of hierarchy is self realization and self actualization needs. This hierarchy continued by [[Alderfer‘s ERG Theory]], from three group core needs, Existance (basic need), Relatedness (social status need), and Growth (self actualization).

[[Two-Factor Theory]] focus more on job satisfaction in workplace. The first of two factors are Motivators that existence will result in job satisfaction. And Hygiene factors that absence will result in job dissatisfaction, like hygiene that if absent will lower health. Motivators may change over time, a few example were: achievement, recognition, work itself, responsibility, advancement, and growth. Some Hygiene factors were: company policy, supervision, working conditions, interpersonal relations, salary, status, job security, and personal life.

[[Self-Determination Theory]] approached motivation through traditional empirical with relation to the Agent essential inner personality development. The three basic need is relatedness, competence, and autonomy. Where certain social environment really plays an important part in the type of motivation that results. There’s two type of motivations that this theory categorizes, with both can manifest in intrinsic and extrinsic action. The first is amotivation, where Agent feels the environment is controlled through monitoring and instructions. The behavior that the Agent make are just to get external rewards or to avoid punishment. The second is autonomous motivation, where motivation result from their own lifestyle and how they engage with their work because innate desire. Behavior that can result from supportive social environments. 

Classical and Operant Conditioning sees behavior as a response triggered by certain environment or physical stimuli. A Classical Conditioning is like a dentist (conditioned stimuli) paired with the pain (unconditioned stimuli) so the patient responds with reluctant because of fear (conditioned response). Operant Conditioning focuses the consequences with encouraging or discouraging certain behavior. Desirable behavior are given a reward as reinforcement, and undesirable behavior are given punishment. Timing of the consequences also important, the longer time pass between behavior and consequences, the effectiveness will be lower. Another factor is environment that can affect the effect of the consequences. Some consequences the usually discourages behavior, may cause different responses on certain environments. There is also a mechanism to study motivation through consequences that have been applied and the resulting responses. 

Motivating Operations (MO) fills the gap of Operant Conditioning that focuses on altering future behavior. Motivating Operations have two effect. The first is Value-Altering Effect, that modify efficiency of a reinforcer. The second is Behavior-Altering Effect, that modify learned behavior. From the type modification that results, MO has two type. The first is Establishing Operation if increasing effect. The second is Abolishing Operation if decreasing effect. 

William McDougall’s Purposive Psychology or Hormic Psychology emphasizes purpose or intent. That behavior is a reflex from intrinsic motivation. 

[[Incentive Motivation Theory]] focuses on the principle of reinforcement. The most common incentive is compensation, that can be tangible or intangible. Still affected be timing, and also by repetitive action-reward will build a habit. A reinforcer is response post action so that the action occur more. With this, differentiating intrinsic and extrinsic is not necessary. This theory influenced by beliefs. Psychologist like B.F. Skinner especially in his Radical Behaviorism that posit every action has social ramifications. So positive or negative response from other will affect behavior. Another unique point of incentive theory from drive theory is that incentive theory focuses on “attracting” the desired action. Reinforcing that result in a happier Agent. Drive theory still involving negative stimuli. Like drinking to eliminate thirstiness. 

Another category is [[Motivation - Behaviorist Theories]], that try to explain based on relation between situation and observable behavior without referencing mental states. A theories that empirical theorist prefer. But an Agent may behave differently even in similar situation. An indicator that internal states, mainly mental states, still has an effect. 

Main paradigm of mental states is desire. Although there’s other states too, like beliefs in relation to obligation or intention. Mental disease can occur when there is no motivation. 

When defining motivation as desire to act, there is two parts, the directional (towards positive stimuli or away from negative) and activated + consummatory (seeking phase + liking phase). From neurobiological point of view, these motivation roots in basal ganglia and mesolimbic (dopaminergic) pathways. Activated "seeking" behaviour (locomotor activity) influenced by dopaminergic drugs, with microdialysis experiment shows dopamine increased with anticipation of rewards. "Wanting Behaviour" also can be increased with microinjections of dopamine and dopaminergic drugs in dorsorostal nucleus accumbens and posterior ventral pallidum, but opioid injections will produce pleasure. Outside these hedonic hotspots, those drugs will increase desire. Decrease or inhibition of dopamine also reduce appetitive behaviour (but not consummatory). Administration of amphetamine that will increase breakpoint in progressive ratio self-reinforcement schedule (Agent will go to greater length to get reward), dopamine also further implicated. When memory influences motivational state (when contextual details needed to reach goals), hippocampus is activated.

A drive or desire can activate a behavior with some goal or incentive. Inherently internal, so may not need external stimuli. There is a few basic drives like hunger, or a more subtle one like achievements. Another basic one is sexual drive. 

From desire point of view, motivation can be intrinsic if the behavior itself is inherently desirable, or extrinsic if the goal is outside the behavior itself. Some argue intrinsic is better than extrinsic.

[[The Intrinsic Motivation]] exists inside the Agent, and an internal rewards, rather than external stimuli. Where the action or behavior itself have positive effect to the Agent. The activity itself providing the motivation and not dependent on external rewards. Many have argued intrinsic motivation promotes subject well being in cognitive, social, and physical development. Intrinsic Motivation also shown in animals like curiosity. Agent that intrinsically motivated (compared to extrinsic motivation) have shown more interest, excitement, and confidence that in turn manifest as enhanced performance, persistence, and creativity. Some theorist posit two core element of intrinsic motivation, self-determination or autonomy and competence. One view is that the Agent internally saw the action or task will increase Agent’s competence. Competence feeling itself can be caused by social contextual event. But competence in itself can't become intrinsic motivation if there is no autonomy. Autonomy will be perceived greater if there is choices, feeling, and opportunities are present. Some study found a negative correlation between external rewards and intrinsic motivation, so high external reward will lower intrinsic motivation. And Mindfulness support Intrinsic Motivation as a factor that promote autonomous motivation. On student study, the will intrinsically motivated if education result being perceived as still under their control (autonomy or locus of control), belief they have the skill to master the subject (self efficacy), and interested in the subject (not just for grades). Intrinsic Motivation more long-lasting, self-sustaining, and satisfying than Extrinsic Motivation, therefore a lot of studies being done to promote learning performance and creativity. But, according to some studies, Intrinsic Motivation is hard to inspire and require a more individual approach from the instructor to identify specific efficient and relevant motivator to specific student.

[[The Extrinsic Motivation]] occur when drive is externally influenced. Might manifest in reward or punishment. The difference is from the action or task itself, does it motivating to the Agent. Since an Agent can have muliple states, there can be Intrinsic and Extrinsic Motivation from the same behavior and usually one outweigh the other. Some study indicate extrinsic reward can create overjustification and lower Intrinsic Motivation, like a child rewarded a star for drawing become less inclined to draw. But some study also suggest that positive or negative extrinsic reward can increase Intrinsic Motivation. We can assume that the type of reward can have an effect on Intrinsic Motivation. Majority of what we do after childhood do is extrinsically motivated since social pressure plays more influence. One advantage is that this motivation is relatively easily to create, but disadvantages is the constant monitoring of the result, since the Agent otherwise will not motivated to do the task. Motivation also ceases if the extrinsic reinforcer are removed. The reinforcer may diminished its influence over time for the same Agent.

[Johnmarshall Reeve](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Johnmarshall_Reeve "Johnmarshall Reeve") distinguishes between four types of extrinsic motivation according to degree of autonomy: External Regulation (least autonomous, Agent only considers consequences, students motivated to get good grade), Introjected Regulation (what Agent thought they "should" be doing, students thought they "should" study), Identified Regulation (from Agent's beliefs of what personally important, student belief that studying is important for their success), and Integrated Regulation (the most autonomous, when motivation come from impression of personal identity, very close to intrinsic motivation, but not because Agent act to express their values not because of the enjoyment or interest of the act itself, student has personal values about knowledge and study because it represent their personal values).

States that bring motivation, or “essentially motivation-constituting attitudes”, and states that circumstance or other states contingent is distinct. [[The Action Desire]] always provide motivation, even if ended up against performing action because of circumstances. Instrumental belief of ways achieving goals, might provide motivational contingent. An Agent may have many goals, but contingent on the Agent's ability or capability. Absence of desire doesn't indicate absence of motivation. Rational deliberation might produce motivation.

Another category is awareness, Occurent and Standing Desires, whether the Agent is aware of the motivation that drives them, between conscious (Occurent) and unconscious (Standing) motivation. Conscious when Agent aware of the motives, and Unconcious when Agent don't. The difference between them is important to Sigmund Freud's psychoanalytical theories. 

Freud says, unconscious has various parts of mind that repressed like anxious thoughts and out of social norm ideas. With censorship as filter barrier from consciousness. But those instinctual impulses has influence as unconscious motivation, where Agents only aware of the goal not actual source. Freud devide as Sexual Instincts (desire to stay alive and ensure mankind), Death Instincts (drive for self destruction, close to Freud id concept that goes for pleasure disregarding consequences), and Self-Preservation Instincts (instinct for assuring Agent feels their behaviour are validated). Sexual and Death like angel and devil on shoulder. For example, Sexual urges to act on Agent attraction but Self-Preservation prevents until its socially acceptable. The three are interdependence, like Freud's psychic theory id, ego, and superego, and act as checks and balances system for what instinct to act on and what behaviour to satisfy as many of them. Priming is another unconscious motivation. A phenomenon of reaction to one stimulus influences reaction to the next stimulus. For example, hearing "cancer" can make Agent less likely to smoke. Visual and Semantic Priming is the most relevant to motivation from various form of Priming. Priming closely related to Exposure Theory (people tend to like things they're exposed to before), phenomenon that frequently used on commercial, product placement on movies and TV shows, and frequently seen on former drug users when exposed to drug related stimuli.

Freud reliance on unconscious motivation been criticize by Gordan Allport who posits that conscious motive are the main source of motivation. When Agent aware and recognize intent behind behaviour, Agent recognize desires, goals, and values, with the drive to act accordingly. Conscious Motivation means Agents are involved in choices and decision taken on behalf of Agent's beliefs, aspiration, and awareness of desires and needs. Contrast with Unconscious or Subconscious that have no awareness.

[[Motivation Socio-Cultural Theories]] sees motivation as result of being inside cultural context of social groups.

The central ideas is that Agent will behave according to what that Agent rationally believe need to be taken. Akrasia, or [[Weakness of Will]], is if the Agent taking irrationally different behavior.

A few field of motivation research is on business with [[ The Work Motivation]] and on education with [[The Learning Motivation]]. Including difference intrinsic and extrinsic effect.

Motivational Reason are practical reason Agent to prefer certain course of action. Contrasted with normative reason that decide what Agent should do from impartial point of view.