---
title: 081009) You're Buying Banks
date: 20081009
tags: #PlanetMoney
citation: "“Planet Money,” _NPR_, 2 Juni 2023. [https://www.npr.org/podcasts/510289/planet-money](https://www.npr.org/podcasts/510289/planet-money) (diakses 4 Juni 2023)."
---

Thanks to a little-noticed provision that's sort of in the $700 billion bailout, the U.S. Treasury says it's preparing to partially nationalize the banking industry. It's a big deal. And not everyone we talked to thinks it will work.

----

One thing we must recognize even with the new treasury of 40s something fail hi and welcome to NPR‘s planet money I’m Adam Davidson and I’m Laura Conaway that was treasury secretary Henri Paul Sendy just heard he was delivering the bad news yesterday and today is Thursday, October 9. It is 5:37 PM here in New York Konomi is doing today sure the Dow is a disaster that’s not where we look at here. We look at the Ted spread and it is bad it is up 8.118% from yesterday 4 1/4 4.23. that’s a scary number that means a credit market part gear, but I was scared as they’ve ever been  And be less than one Yep nowhere near that at least at least less than 1.5 or two we have been reporting for several days now that the $700 billion bail out is not entirely what it appears to be that’s because a few key legislators and it’s not in a plan that economists like a lot better than the original Paulson plant today that plant finally made it to the front pages of here’s the deal. The bill at law allows the US treasury to buy up mortgages from banks that we knew about at the market doesn’t really care about that as much as this other thing  for the government to come in and capitalize the bank if we get them enough money to stay put and it now appears we learned yesterday i’ll send it that is Emily nationalize the bank. They’re gonna use taxpayer money our money to buy shares of the banks not only trouble mortgages are bundles of mortgages actual stock in the bags we called up Christian manicotti he’s with our good friends at RGE monitor and asked him what are taking ownership of banks has a big priority for treasury secretary, Henry Paulson he works able to pull include Dipta in the NHL. No way you’re saying that you’re saying that this priority for treasury to come in, is not explicit in the bill with Kaitlyn can you stop and take right there to the name of this is the troubled asset relief program, and it actually turns out that from Christians perspective and from a lot of others the future of the US economy may depend on the definition of that word asset second word in their from a banks perspective an asset is the opposite of what we think of an asset. When you have a mortgage loan, we have a car loan that he was a liability  pay every month but the banks, the one getting the money and assets for them a liability is something they have to pay every month which means stocks to meet bank technical accounting definition that’s a liability, so the law is a gift treasury authority to buy assets, which, according to a strict legal definition would mean only his mortgage back securities take things he’s kind of lousy things, and nobody wants what Christian minute Gatie wants us to broaden the definition of asset to a more vegan general term to mean something of value  he says that most of Congress didn’t know the language was in there or didn’t understand it. I think it’s understood and understand yeah he was saying that in the debate they just started using this expanded definition of the word I said right right and that God does expanded definition into the congressional record, set a legal precedent to allow the treasury secretary to buy stock in the companies rather than just buying the assets. It’s such a fascinating, weird intersection, politics and law. Yeah, it is sneaky, but it’s also kind of  might be kind of wonderful. I mean it if the talk to you say it is the smart thing to do the right thing to do then it’s kind of cool that we end up there even though they didn’t admit in public if that’s what they were going for when it daddy says we have to end up at this point if we capitalizing the banks is the key to an economic recovery , is it still to me because a little bit like an N run in what I don’t like I should just sit down on that part he doesn’t really see it isn’t Enron and he doesn’t think of my feelings about it or your feelings about the transparency of all the really that important  Acong Rasamala to do the right thing I know that’s the part that’s the part that really sucks Congress did the right thing for that alone shocked me I got to be honest in that in a bipartisan way in a bipartisan fashion but they did the right thing and it’s just I want us to really pay a lot of attention to. How did this happen that the the machinery of our government was heading in with Dhamas? Tell you is the wrong direction they couldn’t say they were heading in the right direction but they just kind of did it because they couldn’t  come out and see what they thought needed as the bank lobby would’ve killed COM so if you don’t like the lack of transparency, blame the bank lobbyists they’re very powerful and they have made it clear to us and in our RV call Dhamas Favorites bank lobbyist got talent. We don’t want the treasury secretary to use this power to basically take ownership stakes in banks and we’re gonna fight so we want to let our stick with the story. We are all over it we’re gonna figure out who snuck it in  a use it and he talking a lot to people like Christian manicotti his boss Nouriel Roubini at the RGE monitor them for the Tiffin Headstart Greg King hey Greg is in Falls Church Virginia and he’s got this question I was wondering what could be done to find a good mortgage, evaluate them all up again yeah, your thing that much about security which is a way of taking 1000 or 5000 individual mortgages putting them all in a big box a big financial box and then selling shares in that box that that complexity has caused all this problems, so why can’t we just go in there  and take them apart right? Well, that is an excellent question that is a crucial question and we’re gonna have to answer that in an extended form. That’s a huge question and I’m not sure anyone can really answer it but the government you have to take a stab, and I did need some guys this week. We’re starting to look at these assets in these giant bundles of mortgages in this market  product to keep hearing about these guys special license. Oh a collateralized debt obligation, and all this American taxpayers are about to own a bunch of part of this, so can’t wait financial container. You put a whole bunch of investments in container to lots of people who, then get money every month that is paid by those investments and those  any sort of investments, it pays a regular cash stream whenever popular investments to put in a CEO with subprime mortgages. The ones that are called toxic waste exactly the type of assets. The government is looking to scoop up and save the economy, and said since no one else wants to buy them videos, or the assets  in the government basically has the vent is no market price of nobody’s buying and selling it’s OK if the governments gonna have to figure out a way to come up with a number they gonna put a bunch of numbers into a computer and Shernoff, some guest frankly about what the CEO products are worth and what they might be worth in the future so we want to understand how this works so I am ask Mike  join me or in your car with him and I talked with Solberg in HD Kim they’re the founding partners of Mission Peak capital these guys been all over this business. They were involved in making a FACIE many years ago at a bank then they worked it raining agencies read them now they work with companies that own them and are trying to figure out how to sell them to the government do what the government now has to do , we decided to look at one CD ON particular the current motto it was put together by Deutsche Bank and closed thousand three although it also has a very complicated toxic assets and a whole Lotta weird stuff but just surprise they were loans on a plane airline routes away how many of a loan of an airline well you know it’s at it you could get receivables from an airline would say look from  between Tokyo and Korea it was loaded up every every Friday in Korean airlines came in. They said look we need we would like to get a loan for a queen and what we will do is everybody that buys a ticket for that point will pay, and that trust will pay self interest, and then give  Metta money and so was the way that that loan that trust what it was was basically getting money before the airline and the airline used the loan if they didn’t wanna get it, you could believe in a specific route to get caught up in the problems with the entire airline  and Korean airlines I just all I care is Korea Japan you you on this particular route and I just any crew Japan I own Fridays at seven that’s the that’s a possibility or dailies at seven or something like that in and that’s the way you get paid and you can evaluate passenger loads and potential for your competition and all of this other stuff and investors like that because it was simple and and they will hurt  they liked it because they could get they could box up breathing thing and then I can go in a lot of different directions to make a lot of bad decisions but if you if you can isolate a specific route or specific market and you can travel all the cash to comes off of that first. It’s actually if it’s a better credit  to understand him calculate formula calculations should be able to figure out the cash flow from that. Don’t worry about the other extra willing people die in route people don’t know that’s just one example of an aircraft security path but one of the show lot of these deals they can be a little complicated there’s not a real big market for it and to one of the homes for video and to be honest, they’re performing quite well of the airlines. Where are you read about the Owen Busines  having all these problems with fuel and everything else as well credit and get a plane in so this one CDL, Coronado CDL I could I could live in a home pay my mortgage and part of that mortgage payment goes to Koni then I could go to my office and my office building it’s mortgage which is also partly going to come on my way to work. I can make a cell phone call in with us in the cell phone tower that handles my call is sending money part of which goes to the CEO  and I could fly home to visit my mother from Phoenix to Topeka and that ticket I’m paying is going on and that’s why in some of the disappearance of this product it has had to change the people that build cell towers that field office buildings rent real estate residential loans in in in in so that big bank  for the work I know it’s so weird to see cause mortgages with us come with so many other things that we’re going to be on route 60 Yvonne, the David Bowie by David Bowie you can get a bond FaceTime David Bowies expect a future earnings. They also have other famous peoples royalty streams to the US government, Mike Lyons David Bowie there’s a lot of things from England called hug the securitizations  better OK what’s that? Basically you want to Castrin from a bunch of hub up to we really love each day and wet and we’re gonna spend a lot of time with them over the next few weeks. We’re thinking of actually doing a road trip. See the evaluation we talked about that this morning about to go to the pub evaluation. I would love to go , take one of these and figure out. What is it last week we heard from the sky Tom corona tradition Asian securities he was saying that the short term lending market completely frozen up friend is stepping into that backing up that stuff to get that right? No no no we we we talk to Tom corona couple weeks ago we put them on the smoker , he helpful and we were hoping things have been that was before the bail out that was before the trip feds changed it back to commercial paper so yesterday we called his coworkers to sit a few desks away and will ask. Actually we heard of some. my big blows going to 1617. I don’t believe we saw them here, but we heard of a few billion trading to various European names  are not big time is crack trays so we don’t know the sizes we don’t know the names so we don’t traders better than not here is a friend telephone. It could’ve been a 50 million pray that by the time of God if I came here six weeks ago, not doing anything in CDs. What is he doing down? There is doing is talking to his customers trying to let them know that what’s going on health and helping them understand why they can’t get any money when he can’t borrow any money and he’s short term markets  he has been able to make some money selling treasury bills basically what’s happening is investors and other banks won’t let any money to back to any banks because they don’t trust them so they’re putting all their money in treasury bills which are considered absolutely safe because these are issued by the US government  for the US government pays very little interest because they don’t have to pay a high interest to convince people to buy them right now that somebody come in looking for treasury bills, they wanna buy out today, and the offering is one basis, point one basis points one penny, on $1.01 penny  bills Friedland zero last week there were some bills that actually transact at 80 they just want to put it in the mattress exactly so what do you guys think needs to be done? These guys are pretty unimpressed by what’s happened so far they said the $700 billion bail out is not gonna open up the short term credit markets he  notion to raise the water level they insist it would have to happen if the government needs to guarantee all deposits in all the major banks not the FDIC thing up to 250,000 but all deposits for stock each other and that affects all each other they don’t listen to you  paid your salary and on it market basically an in United States not basically the inner back market is frozen for the simple reason that and you hear this everywhere you turn banks are afraid to one to each other, and until the US president stops to print being imposter, and all they need to do is say one thing we guarantee deposit six months of Nl and this one is enough  I think it’s worth pointing out that the economist we talk to a really hot on this buying stock yet yeah it’s really interesting they said economistic to off in the air somewhere they don’t understand the real fundamentals of the market we’re gonna be talking about economists, and these guys are gonna be checking in with tradition angel securities as often as we can. I love you a whole bunch of guys got a great tape  time to get through it all right now but we’re gonna be here in for this tradition. A.CHAL guys a lot you listen for Adam story Friday all morning edition question really like hearing your questions. We also want to know how are we doing? How are we helping you understand this crisis? Better planet money npr.org or just visit I said npr.org/money I am Adam Davidson and I’m Laura Conaway. Thanks for listening . 

----
