---
title: 081008) A Very Scary Cut - in the Interest Rate
date: 20081008
tags: #PlanetMoney
citation: "“Planet Money,” _NPR_, 2 Juni 2023. [https://www.npr.org/podcasts/510289/planet-money](https://www.npr.org/podcasts/510289/planet-money) (diakses 4 Juni 2023)."
---

The U.S. lowered a benchmark interest rate today, along a slew of central banks in other countries. Amir Sufi says the fix may lie in getting people to spend more money, somehow. Simon Johnson objects to Europe's patchwork response to the financial crisis. And David Kestenbaum finds a guy who knew the bailout boss way back when.

----

Hi and welcome to NPR in Adam Davidson leader of the free world that one from Tom Brokaw me neither today is Wednesday, October 8. It is 3:20 AM here in New York and moving time for all we know everything but here’s what we have a wonderful show for you today Little bit after I woke up this morning email alert that there was a global coordinated Rika? central banks from Europe Switzerland interest rates all at the same time now in the number that is a big big deal we can clear what that means so we are gonna do to break this down and we had  to we have this with Chicago. What is a Reika Cat is this front page news, or at least in the short term of humor, and by a usually cool of having quite possibly attempting to but this was not just the federal reserve and we knew before this morning he basically told us yesterday that he was going to cut interest rate coordinator  we had we had to of the federal reserve with your bank of England, Sweden and Switzerland and Canada all heading right at the same moment. What’s the significance of me my life is in dollars why do I care that Sweden and Switzerland in Canada UK are joining in on today’s global  Together on every day people and very high brow economist agree upon is that the expectations of consumer economy is going to be good bad and bad is absolutely critical car and part of weather world are trying to do is to manage expectations of consumers so there we become the therapist, the emotional counselors of the world leaders can you help me with my own anxiety about this what it is  $100 billion bill at Vail pass ad was moving into buying commercial paper basically saying it would offer that wasn’t gonna be enough and then the next day we get up and they put the interest rate. I think you’re exactly right I completely agree with you that part of managing  And being able to convince them that the action have a real difference on the economy and I think of the market reaction in the days after allowed in the day buyback program reaction. I think the expectation that whatever is wrong with the economy doesn’t have the power to fix it  And I want to switch to the consumer home on the phone this morning that is not happening in America. Basically the government and I said the media is focused on this Reddit other other people as the sum total of this price is different let me be clear from the beginning that I think there is a very important credit crunch going on that is likely to have , however just about everything and therefore we see a dramatic cycle folks buying stuff exactly exactly in a Walmart target that kind of shake. My head on the matter is very negative. People are not buying this morning that I went from serving out three pieces of fruit to my family  Got up a little bit yesterday for consumer borrow a Credit card an auto loan in the month of August -15 year and that’s cool really got into it and trying to make exactly what we did in the second quarter 2008 in the second 1:45 thousand 8 2.5%  in the second quarter 2008 number came out we know that I’m basically getting money back to hell hole through direct check very well documented that when the government so I think it’s been a little surprising to me that all of the policy response points in the last month  at the financial industry and not directly have to help people not borrowing other credit cards pal or is it that they’re not even asking them are really hard to come by. There is no doubt that credit standard bank very long is the same. Bang will be on on willing to finance mortgage  Credit throughout now I don’t know right now Chicago graduate school. Thank you so much for depressing we’ve been depressed to be depressed. That was a real autonomously promise you off he was celebrating the eve holiday and his parents home news reporting a number of European bank in the last few days , I didn’t exactly say Simon Johnson to get out still do not get it judge them management it’s so happens to run a websiteof.com. That’s a really great we’re doing rake it down for you. I did with the quickly pretty quickly it’s a complete mess in Europe end , is there a way to understand why they can’t just get together it is it a central argument is it the UK versus it off the question countries with jointly stand ready to bail out any bank? Pop the question of a bail out fun European gathering, and this was the idea that all the European countries would jointly stand ready to bail out any bank in any European European Union and Nl and the German reaction was a no for the war an endeavor not one, so I don’t know I don’t think that Ulfah want to go in with a friend All the and Hiten hand ring and came out with general open so if you know Adi, I don’t know it’s like where the Germans have heavy have an economic got to do it or is it more it’s simply we had until two days ago we had to leave some practices if you guys did not  as a couple of wrong ideas ideas 1929 or 1931 or a note 1928, 1933 all in three weeks very bad and they will next time over here encouraging bad behavior in open but yeah if you would’ve came back today down the road  if you were going and then he would go pretty need to do and sets of the Europeans is it hopeless? What what what’s your sense of what we can expect they learn and they are coming to federal coming to Washington for the G7 meeting in the world are important Looney Tunes is it gonna be hearing it from  That around I think I’m playing the US but I think that they’re probably there and make an innovation like that and they will be able to see what happens in the washer then we can do well. People were stuck forever anything this morning they will update updates. Are you worried about that because  Because it will just sit operation in the way and Bang for about a half of all the security filter on spring for 50-50 where the bad stuff going to be between Europe and you and Europe, and that was part of the inability to get ahead of it and thanks so much to Simon Johnson to help me a lot understand some of these challenges Rimrock, Tom Youngs of Pittsburgh check in with a question about the bill out of AIG that the US rescues the insurer with an $85 billion loan and then I hear yesterday, that couples  Fine for the Congress about an adult resort in California on 80% of the time that’s a really great question I want to talk about Edi and then I want to talk about this issue with government control more broadly. Basically what happened is the federal reserve well they bailed out AIG after we’ve done a lot of recording on it after the massive worlds biggest insurance company came close to collapsing and in return the US government has warrants for stock basically gives them control of the company 79.5% ownership of the company and right away they use that control they got rid of chief executive. The chief executive they got rid of a bunch of senior executives put in people, apparently chosen by treasury secretary, Henry Paulsen, to run the day-to-day Operations  Know what you’re talking about is a few days later leading executive spent $440,000 at the Saint Regis resort south of Los Angeles on the eighth he tells us and also included $23,380 worth of spa treatments I didn’t know that was possible I’m sorry, but I hope I don’t see how many people it is your whole eyebrow tweezers, whatever  It’s 500 each anyway it’s a company with 116,000 employees according to Wikipedia as assets of $1 trillion a minute massive company in the US government definitely not approving everything it doesn’t have a little managers in there you know team and and is allowing that leader ship team to run a broader point and a crucial point over the next weeks and months and years a crucial crucial point is what is the US government role in private industry and this is a new question this is the question for all of us as citizens for the government right now I covered the warning rock and I was in Iraq the week after the ground war ended in April  12 2003 and I remember later that week I happened upon a shoe factory in Baghdad and this was a FACIE that had been saved from looters. It was totally intact and I walked in and the entire staff was sitting in the lobby and I said oh are you guys you can’t operate know we have all the oil in the generator with everything we need at the wrong material but we don’t know how many shoes to make or what kind because usually it’s the government tells us , and in a place like Iraq before the war, or in the Soviet union or another Tino socialist economies who actually have a guy in the ministry of industry or whatever who sits there and says all right shoe company X you make 3000 loafers this week and it is not a market mechanism it’s not people buying and selling and I would I had this sort of frustrating and fascinating talk  Through one choose you can make shoes and he said no no we get our instructions from the government, and I think it’s safe to say that virtually nobody in or out of the US government wants that to happen for a variety of reasons the government is generally considered not very good at deciding how to run private companies in the government you can give a lot of power usually to one person is a bureaucrat rather than a much more complex market mechanism  Market but when a situation where a lot of companies in America are collapsing in the US government, for what are stepping in, so don’t we have a right to call the shots this is a fundamental question that hasn’t been answered yet in the Bernanke Paulson plan that was passed by Congress and signed by the president last week. There is the option of buying stock, the government directly buying ownership of companies, but the language seems to suggest they are going to have non-voting shares meaning they would they could own most of a company, but not have the right to put someone on the board not have the right to  Put round if we use the AIG model where it’s literally the treasury secretary, picking the CEO and directing the actions of the CEO of most of the major financial institutions so we don’t know yet the plans are not at all clear we don’t know what’s gonna happen, but this for guys like me for reporters to cover this for many many people this is going to be perhaps the single most important question of the next year. Take your time use. We hope that helps the next step. We have are very unfair. Monies David Keston bow  is lovely and turns out that David knows this guy who went to school with the man who was suddenly the most important person in the US economy possibly are we got a picture to prove we have a picture to prove it I kiss my friend is Tom Dontrell. He took a class with Neel Kashkari Neel Kashkari is the man who is spend that $700 billion which effectively means he’s getting less we can we are yeah he can choose which banks survive which ones fail I mean not to be too dramatic. The future of the US economy is in his 35 year old hand. He and Tom Delta went to school , it was unbelievable I asked first I didn’t know who he was. I just thought I know that guy and I read that he was in charge of $900 billion. Is there a pull over I know that guy yeah. So tell me tell me what you remember from so you went to college with him yes, I was an undergraduate. He was a graduate student purple for mechanic Orangetheory , he was the head of the store car project solar car prank phone right now. I got a new name of the north American dollar car race so basically build that you build solar cars in the race in exactly exactly so we had a car that you had a car in the rain and he was in charge of directing all the building that  Car OK so he was running a team and you were on the team building a car crash or else he remember he was funny remember in meetings for you if there is one time we were up early and we were hooking up the car to rookie of the trailer bring the car somewhere and there is a mechanical engineers, Ruth a PC to who didn’t know which way to put the lock washer on the trailer hitch  I was very funny was making fun of him for that sucks but I’ll be back on stairs look at my face with and Matt space did he live in math space no he was pretty down or what was it like as an organizer it was a really intense about it  And yeah, going to getting people motivated remember at the time I thought a couple of education for a little strange we’re working on building our own motor actually constructing from scratch with wires and winding them resin our own motor to try the car and I I thought even an undergraduate I thought for sure they  Not picking a motor for a car that we were trying to be as late as possible. Wonder and what would happen at my I hope we never got anything. We spent a lot of time finding copper wire around the bottles and then resin. He’s been a lot of time in the lab more than like more than I did, but in the end week if that didn’t work at all, I don’t think we ever got to a point where we  Know you went but like we weren’t bologna which is what is doing his buying of things yeah maybe I would start so what do you think about him managing this $700 billion at stabilization playing well I hope you know like I haven’t seen him in 12 years so I am not alone. What happened to Fred anecdotally I don’t really know that much about what you’re doing. I know I know he was ambitious common smart, not Andy and a bad way, but if he might be worth  a smart TV from Aladdin I guess I would say he’s done I don’t have any reason to he couldn’t do it was your reaction when he saw the photo like wow this guy I know he’s now in charge of $700 billion. Yes it will the directly thought of them several times we were on the call report card project together, and I wondered what he’s up to. I figured he was working for Taman Kreatif , what kind of automotive are you kind of high tech design work but you get it was for a while we’re gonna paddle it yeah but you’re wrong now now I’m wrong and now I’m at Simmons Coppell theater. It’s funny that I love my budget. Thanks David and that’s the plan it Monday podcast for today October 8. We are always online we got the blog we got the podcast at npr.org/money I’m Adam Davidson I’m Laura Conaway thank you for listening . 

----
