---
title: 081021) Embarrassing Questions for Billionaires
date: 20081021
tags: #PlanetMoney
citation: "“Planet Money,” _NPR_, 2 Juni 2023. [https://www.npr.org/podcasts/510289/planet-money](https://www.npr.org/podcasts/510289/planet-money) (diakses 4 Juni 2023)."
---

Mark Cuban owns the Dallas Mavericks, a cable network and the brand-new BailoutSleuth.com. Plus: We answer a listener question about auctions and credit default swaps. Hang in there; we're all catching up.

----

Support for this NPR podcast in the following message come from better help online counseling by licensed professional counselor specializing in issues including depression, stress and anxiety is it betterhelp.com/money to learn more and get him percent off your first month we talk about greed we talk about lack of regulation of poor regulation to talk about people over borrowing buying houses that have no reason by an hours But doesn’t offend your sensibility I guess that’s at all this Baylor has to come from. I am welcome to NPR’s planet money I’m Adam Davidson. Ignore the music. We are still in a financial crisis. Hi Laura Conway today’s Tuesday, October 21. It’s about 4:29 PM here in New York City and we’ve got a great show today. Adam calls the most embarrassing question ever asked a billionaire , without time Laura for the planet money indicator’s dad has can you to fuck his what we’ve been hoping to see this is our our main indicator these days the measure of how many is moving through the global economy from bank to bank. How nervous is it is down well below 3.7 for today more than 8% fall from yesterday we always go every day now to tradition angel securities. There are friends on the front lines of the credit crisis  Right now but John Trico has very generously picked up their baton. Hey Jack, good good so we check with you guys today that you are we are you are this credit card you are right on the front lines normally in normal times banks will use you guys to borrow and lend billions of dollars every day for the last since September 15. Basically it’s been fleetly frozen no landing at all on Friday. We were hearing rumors of some other treating just beginning to see a thought on the credit freeze yesterday I think you guys moved to a few hundred million  Out for you to add, so, John how did today go? Is this ice continuing to thaw hopefully and hopefully this week today a plan with a guy to create a new facility to be used in an effort control by the private sector from the purchase some of her stress LIBOR opens up around read my Bible , great volleyball tomorrow 5355 way today that’s another positive market normal normal state level one way to go but we did she kill 1 billion better warm up so that’s a big deal definite dub full of us natural buyers coming to the market as well, she Desha yeah  Vine call dad deposit weathers that well that’s that’s great news Jan but but not back to where we were before September no no correct text in Work in progress time and hopefully can you measure to help Ceysa Process Kali no I do whatever it takes normal, Greg, John Trico, edition Azle securities, talking to him. He’s in lower Manhattan really on the front lines of credit prices of the front line  Office but still he is right with John. Thanks so much OK thank you and fed this morning real quick a lot about Tom down there. Been calling for this for a long time. Yeah they are saying that no one wants to buy this commercial paper. The short term overnight, big IOUs because I don’t think they can , write if you’re a money market mutual fund which is basically like a fancy savings account you need to be ready to give people money if they ask for their money and Yolanda billion dollars to another bank get this IOU in return but tomorrow from your customer say hey I want my  Money and you can’t sell that hire you because nobody else wants to lead money to bank risky so now the federal reserve it said, I don’t worry sell it will take care of. It will make sure that will buy basically basic idea it would time and women on the blog I pointed out that will is a little trouble but but it seems to be from a John has had , an interesting because the federal reserve earlier came in and said we wanna offer commercial paper we will now make up businesses now they’re also saying yes this today is yet. Another massive expansion in this today’s announcement lock down in the middle of it normal time at three years ago or something it would be like the biggest news of the century  Transformation of the role of the central bank force every day and having massive transformations one more step. It’s a subtle one. This is really important. This means that basically the US federal reserve is it boarding the risk of our finances for everybody on all sides of these investments exactly , yes I think it does kind of get to you. I got a list of questions today about something in the news. Answer it by the Doris Wiseman of Washington DC. I’ve been hearing a lot about these ideas of options bohemian just wondering what they work how do you feel like? I am so with you I want to know exactly yeah yeah I feel , like I’ve heard the word auction at any point in my life so we call my friend Hampton finer I went to high school with him but he’s now grown up and is the Japanese superintendent of the New York State Department of insurance hey Hamdan how you doing Adam all right how are you  a real expert in Pak Bobi so we actually have an extended conversation with you but we’re gonna play later this week but I wanted to sneak in a question with a great one and 1/8 Judith so when we hear about an auction in the financial market setting, should we be picturing like a big hall and there’s a guy with a gavel and there’s a bunch of people with like things with numbers on them holding them up saying I’ll take a day  That sellers and they are a bid on and there’s a laconic and it worked out what we call in economics right and out real bonds are being sold so if it’s not everyone’s not in one place they’re in their office take over the world in London could anyone take part or do you have to have a special license  Plate only a dealers are allowed to put their name and other investors and there’s one going on today for Lehman Brothers rhombus last week or day last week that the buyers did for whatever they wanted to pay. The people who had them agreed to except that price it came in at something like an average eight $.80 on the dollar or something really low , so today they’re actually for protection 91 a little more than $.91 on the dollar dollar to people who died will be there at settled if I happen to buy a bond from Lehman brothers and I own it and it’s like $100 bond and I got a little nervous maybe a year ago that Lehman brothers Michael out of business I might’ve called you Hampton and said hey, I want to buy protection which is basically almost like a form of insurance and I would say to you, I’m gonna give you a couple bucks a year and then you get to keep that Apple box, but if Lehman defaults if they go bankrupt or in my phone to suddenly worth a lot less or nothing, you have promise to make me home to give away  $100 and you can return timer to give me the phone when I left and $100 I’m gonna get right so so and that’s basically where we are now that the only question is we knew we knew the bonds were worth less than $100, but we didn’t know how much less exactly reliable Mac  Sherman what interestingly going into the auction is a little bit more like 12 question why would their bond have any utterly without out that it was just me and you don’t have enough resources but Midtown they have a lot of big portfolios now so there’s going to be some recovery value to the enterprise  Get that money I see Nl and we don’t know what that recovery is yet. We don’t know what they’re gonna sell the building for whatever and so basically the auction allows the wisdom of the crowd. It basically allows the global investor class to place bets on how much value they think these things are gonna be worth  a liquid market in Lina’s dad, even though they’re no longer in a position to one, so whoever that marketplace or whoever paid 8 1/2 cents or nine cents presumably, they believe that these bonds when they will be worth more than that and whoever sold, it believes they won’t be, but that’s the price with those two sides  Market clearing mechanism that make sure that all the people that were a good thing I’m getting a strong sense from you. Yes, effective way of discovering be without a lot of the gift in the larger bond market at the very end of laboratory that’s been very effective has been 14 so far , no no ever ever thanks Eli to Doris Wiseman for asking the impossible question and Hampton finer for answering I’m starting to get it just like this thing up a little bit yeah and by the way, I think planet money we try and make everything clear in one step so complicated stick with it  Being in tear into your brain yes this is complicated stuff. We have a crisis that’s to make it clear he actually sits between us. Yes we’re just calling out to each other all day in the middle. He’s NPR sports reporter friend and he has been trying to get me on the phone with this guy for for weeks  Guy because he really straddles the world of sports and I hadn’t heard of him OK is that horrible Mark Cuban name I didn’t really know who he was. He’s the owner of the Dallas Mavericks. He also owns each team at the cable networks he made billions of dollars literally I think makes it to .8 billion class counts from broadcast.com, and he also has awesome blog blog maverick.com and and some other blogs , I see it with so Peskin I called him to see what he has to say about the financial crisis before we get into the various topics. Embarrassing question for me when I look at my stock portfolio that I mean that’s going to determine how are you? What kind of life I have you know and I’m young enough that it’s OK but my parents you know what means it changes every time a picture in the world where you’re gonna have a good life no matter what happens  And you were in Wichita big believer in in market incentives and all of that you know you’re glad that you made smart choices. I got you more money. I bet you’d be upset if you lost money, but is it what is it at that point when it doesn’t actually affect you anymore, is it just keeping score? Is it an intellectual , and is it a unique way to keep score but I think a lot of people take it off by the bank account and I am because of how much money I have an exact off today but I look at myself as well like you’ve got in the world and I just try to have fun and and  Dad I had fun before I have a more fun but I guess the question is there’s no if you want half $1 billion there’s nothing that you couldn’t do because of that I assume I mean you can do whatever you want at your current level, not gonna be limited bye-bye bye  You know it and within a normal day-to-day life is there’s nothing you know you can’t get greedy you can’t you want more and more and more because you’re if you just bird for the next patient for the next dollars and you take on leverage everything to get anything more I want to get to blog Maverick which is your blog and normally it’s just about whatever’s going on in the world are occurring to you lately. It’s been all about economics, which is a reflection of the national mood. Are you have a one interesting proposals on block Maverick let’s go over a couple of her one was  Mark to market accounting which I mean maybe Adam could add to find it the little bit easier as I understand it is these banks have his assets no one really knows what they’re worth so the government says he put a price tag on it and they do but no one really knows if that price tag is accurate they’re kind of guessing so you had a solution for this which was what I mean  Transparency and you know it if you don’t have enough information as a CFO of a bank or or a bank because the market will give you an updated to make a decision based off of the fact that, thanks you’re gonna need filled out and I need capital infusion rather than just leaving. It’s a busy  Usual if you should be publishing all the data about all the ads that you have and he’ll buy evaluation of what you wanted that only bad at a better price than you might otherwise be able to get and I guess the bank that that’s our proprietary information we don’t want to reveal all the secrets we have on our you know the investment we have what exposure we have  Change up in our financial time money and you’re on your own. Another interesting idea is something called ETFs which are stocks they trade on the market but they’re a collection of her make up clothes then fun, but right differential if the government is going to be buying any assets  From there obviously having to take money from the treasury of it or borrow it through treasury, bills, etc. and then give that money to the bank of it. They’re going to buy it whatever price they’re going to buy it then it goes into that government a bit that we never know anything more about and I think that’s been a great big problem and even if it makes money for them like everybody will never really know because it goes in  to the general treasury and to that point, and what I suggested was to say, look, you can identify the assets that you’re going to buy whether they’re home condos, mortgages mortgage mortgage, back securities platter like that whatever it is identifying and packaged them together into it electronically traded fund and what happens then is everybody on Wall Street or any individual event institutions  on whatever we have the opportunity to buy shares and that’s fun but if the treasury has an example spend $250 billion for assets and they post all those that this is in then I’ll three of us can go in there and buy whatever share price to pay $200 billion. There are 10 billion and then you and Iwan can go in there and actually purchase the shares and the $20 per share  What was spent by him and so then all of a sudden it really is a good market for these undervalued over value real value of the actor important element there too one as individuals can participate so that if we use a good deal who won who won go for 20 30,40 whatever he worth and two in an ATM  Format and because you can tell it is in an open end then you immediately reduced amount of money that comes out of the treasury that comes out of the taxpayers pocket. No I’m pretty sure our listeners are going to send in a variety of comments some positive and simple fine really smart issues with this. I’ll tell you two things that jump out is that that are on your positive for you  What is a big problem with this complete lack of movement of these toxic assets right now is there’s only so many institutions in the world that might basically really large banks are really large pension funds, that kind of thing and all of pretty much anyone who might buy them already owns them and so they don’t want to buy any more of these toxic  Are talking about it you know Mike and I can’t go out and buy one of these assets cause they’re hundreds of millions of dollars to buy in so you’re talking about expanding to the retail investor and just creating a much bigger pool type millions of us can buy a 1 million and I get  The other than it for the other I guess it’s positive is if it doesn’t work and nobody’s interested the treasury so to where they are now anyway. I am a huge fan of something that you have helped launch just over the weekend on Friday yeah and and I was getting ready to email Chris and Chris carrier, editor and say hey , yeah, absolutely about the government being investors with our architect, and COD and oversight committee of a five people that I would trust.com and he is is I’m on my own dime I’m hiring several reporters to go out there and just keep an eye on what’s going on with the veil out and already things are coming to light  The contractor for the bail out and already in the contractor to make them available publicly pacific information like the rates are paying for the actual people in fall and Eno transparency why in the world would they rejected the rate that they’re paying and making a public in and being somebody or having an organization that just monitors and babysit them continuously I think it will put pressure on them to increase the transparency of of all these transactions  Thank you Mark Cuban through. I really enjoyed our conversation and we have a link to his blog at npr.org/money are blocked by the wayhisblog isbillout sleuth.com. They looked into one of the very first contracts that treasury said to to associate with a $700 billion bail out and found it a lot  Business contract. Basically the taxpayers hiring the bank of New York Mellon just to take part in this $700 billion bill out to them and it is redacted like a CIA secret prison. Yeah you can see the contract on the treasury website and it’s just completely half of it is just completely blacked out. For example there’s no sign of how much we’re paying  or shall be paid and then somebody just got the magic marker out and can price it out. It’s pretty amazing. I’m really excited about this new blog, I hope they keep digging up some great stuff like this I will keep Lincoln to the zoo and I also like Mark’s personal blog, it’s kind of interesting. He is very unique you that’s black Maverick and that’s another day on planet money we’re online npr.org/money send pictures of the economy as you see it around you and go to npr.org/money and look I just put a shout out there we’re doing the first of what we hope will be a regular feature the economist house call Simon Johnson a baselinescenario.com in the former chief Acong message  is going to help us assess your place in the global economy and I don’t mean you if you go to npr.org/money Elisa little bit about you Bob maybe pick you to call you Friday morning and assess replacement for the tournament I am Adam Davidson, Anggora Conway. Thanks for listening . 

----
