---
title: 081002) Washington Mutual Banker Saw Trouble Coming
date: 20081002
tags: #PlanetMoney
citation: "“Planet Money,” _NPR_, 2 Juni 2023. [https://www.npr.org/podcasts/510289/planet-money](https://www.npr.org/podcasts/510289/planet-money) (diakses 4 Juni 2023)."
---

William Longbrake, former CFO of Washington Mutual, says he first started worrying about the housing market in 2002. He gives Adam Davidson and Alex Blumberg the inside view of WaMu's collapse, and his take on the Wall Street bailout.

----

Support for planet money in the following message come from Jess works just works helps teams of all sizes. Get access to high-quality affordable, benefit, automated payroll, compliance, support, and HR to us all in one place get two months free when you go to justworks.com/money now you’re very anxious. I can hear your voice there for the sake of the country and even the sake of the market I think you should act recruiting late and the little bit of calling your voice today in Boni podcast please Thursday, October 2 I Laura on the way it’s about 5:22 PM here in New York we just heard the soothing words of representative Marcy chapter of Ohio. She was talking to a TV reporter this week so we all calm down news of the financial crisis  Atropos today Senate voted for the $700 billion bail out bill last night. We expecting a vote in the House of Representatives on Friday. Meanwhile, we got an email from Elisa Nick Budi today Cody rides everyone everywhere. Every form of media seems to be saying the same thing we need to do something about this economic crisis but what if we Do  What would be the long-term picture of it action Godey I’m allowed to play a very, very rich someone who has an answer his own answer to your question. His name is William long, great service, financial officer for Washington mutual from 1980 to 2002 long bridge state with a bag all those years after I took left and failed last month. He sat down and talk to Adam Davidson and Alex Bloomberg  a couple of major story verses for all things considered on Friday. The second is very special edition of this American life‘s weekend their interview with Wie long Greg was kind of a breakthrough by the bed. What was the first thing that was there was there initial sign you saw in the long run  Time is it grows create an affordability problem reach and that’s exactly what happened or going up. Everybody was getting all the wealth and they were cute call monster all the time is housing prices were getting higher and eventually have a lot of that with you go into a meeting at Washington mutual and say hey guys I’m feeling a little weird about this phone processor you’re laughing oh I absolutely did that and what did they said I’m laughing because you’re asking that question I said 2003 I did that  They didn’t listen to you. Let me imagine imagine I am the CEO of Washington mutual Bill laundry company really fast it makes me nervous. I think there’s a risk here we’re not aware of and I say call in the mortgage department is going on we’re making more money than we’ve ever made in our lives, and we think we will continue to make more money than we’ve ever made in my life for a long time, and the CEO goes like it  to build and make and not make more money or an ignore bill and make more money. It seems like an easy choice or unfortunately it was that it was more than just the morning shoveling to thousand people stop playback that’s actually exactly right no thousand six offender loaning Mika depot well not everybody know that we’re not paying back and Cambria  And I think this is the Washington Utah is doing this as well and that’s when you start seeing the actual number 6% of the house is now because the client is it buy a house it when the losses begin a sales price is fine stop bridge unfortunately that work  Often times it does make up for the loss of others is there how do you feel to be watching it? What is it like that let me give you my sister-in-law we all go through the breathing process and with loved ones and pick please have time to rest yes  But it wasn’t that makes sense to me. Is it wrong or better? Have you have voted? He said 82, 50, 20, 26,46 years is it been fuck about now is that this is the guy today mortgage from two systemwide problem spreading do you have any Sasa? How does it? How does somebody loves him in , the other other other banks banks foreign governments, but so all these people there and then on the other side well playing field, so what happens in a quick link fire you don’t know right and if you was it as an institution, Tiur Busines, you can’t get 20% you don’t have any money to let out no way of making money  Right and so and so what you’re saying is it the becomes exit of it fear that we’re gonna live with the bank someone has West phones then the relationship is it the small business customer needs to have a drawn credit for us to paint making our McClanahan and the bank doesn’t have the money to give to them or or personalize it this way homeowner has the aqua  Credit which they can draw on paper towns, expensive lots of people have homework what’s the banks of November and doing things have been arbitrarily loosen so those those are real consequences and it creates worse and actually makes it possible for them so that that that’s it that’s the consequences of like a bag  Down and that’s that’s a Customer hi let you button and then I’ll I’m identify if you go down that I don’t then that’s a loss for me then I’m that’s the casket so just like you had lasis and Irvan inside now they have losses of their lives inside and they’re going from  Money that you take her just wanted to be honest I feel like I want it to be rational pan right? Because if it’s a rational panel of panic with a little bit of time everyone I come down in and figure things out if it’s rational, that means we really are  as bad often with a rush shot OK well irrational panic moment president Herbert well, I hope that doesn’t sound too dark with Epson pretty dark bill you’re saying is that but housing is at the bottom and in the process of that set of keys to make sure that like me to the botanical  Far far worse but let’s just say for now does it mean like I walk around Manhattan humor stores close people out of work or does it mean like I need a lot of canned soup in my basement bottled water and I ate people are talking about the work off of Wi-Fi and says thank you  it is understandable that doesn’t mean that one edit but I was just gonna say that I don’t believe that’s gonna happen well and I am question necessary directions another picture which I think you’re gonna tell me is absolutely ridiculous. It is not at all other picture is a room meltdown of our financial system where there is, I go to the ATM machine there’s no cash there cause the bank doesn’t have enough cash , I go I want to write a check but my bank is under FDIC receive a shipment that is every other bank around and there’s a chaos. My employer can’t pay me because they can’t get the short term loan to make payroll this month and I’m starting to you know trade my furniture for chickens in order to eat because I wanted to let you know our financial system has broken and I don’t know who has , there is a place near me in Brooklyn that sells live chickens. I’m gonna go there today I like to know them I don’t forget to bring that we become a barter economy that money Sisi any meeting is that on the table? No, you were right by my question I am I hear people set a talking about like the people  Which and her baby daddy late 70s early no fuck it now it’s $700 billion in public so to buy the sesame it’s gonna go to the to the same people who make them right and then there is a sense I think you have the public and you know you’re a part of the show that says that is this  Isn’t an argument argument we need that but what the market there are people with cash they have to let it out do you know there are companies that are solvent isn’t there an is there an argument to me that why why you’re gonna fuck you Grace OK if you’re a true believer, free markets  Are you so well but at what cost processing correction: pressure roll form manage correction, that would be my first consequences but we can’t promise the other administration for not explaining what we’ve been home purchase done with the balance. You can talk about earlier so it will hold those until the price passes they will collect it  And eventually sell but there is every chance for patients nobody is it oh 7 billion that was William Longbrook former chief financial officer of Washington mutual he talk to Alex Bloomberg and Adam Davidson and that’s the planet money podcast for today Thursday, October 2 rock to watch the great vice presidential debate on Laura Conaway take care 

----
