---
title: 081010) World Spins Faster, Takes Dow with It
date: 20081010
tags: #PlanetMoney
citation: "“Planet Money,” _NPR_, 2 Juni 2023. [https://www.npr.org/podcasts/510289/planet-money](https://www.npr.org/podcasts/510289/planet-money) (diakses 4 Juni 2023)."
---

Wall Street set a new benchmark today. Oct. 10 marked the first time the Dow Jones Industrial Average has traveled a thousands points in a single day. Meanwhile, the wheels of the great bailout machine rolled forward. A listener asks everyone's mortgage question. And a panhandler finds his niched in the faltering global economy.

----

Support for this NPR podcast in the following message come from better help online counseling by licensed professional counselors, specializing in issues including depression, stress and anxiety is it betterhelp.com/money to learn more and get 10% off your first month from the worlds 20 leading a Cummins Unmistakable signal whether I will come through this together I am welcome to NPR‘s planet money. This is where we try using overwhelming financial economic crisis news and just make it understandable interesting even funny sometimes I am Adam Davidson and I’m Laura Conaway that was the president you just heard over the chirping birds I think the CNN people have left  President Bush appeals for confidence confidence has not been the watch word of the day. I don’t think too many people on Wall Street listen to the president to carefully today’s Friday, October 10. It is 5:37 PM here in New York. Yeah I remember watching a Twitter crowd today were twitter.com/planet money and they’ve spent the day watching the Dow swing around it looks like it doesn’t know which way is up down north south can you please tell them what is going on well honestly I wish I could I hate today for some reason this was the day I liked the least families of all been overwhelming, confusing frustrating days but they’ve been kind of exciting and at most days there’s some thing of a clear narrative, the narrative my change day today  Just confusing me the Dow I get was happening to four so I’m gonna creeks way back up above where it opened seem to be doing at the moment and was saying that she thought it was just rumors of this and that what is it the seven might do something this week yeah, I’ve been hearing rumors all day long huge from older US governments about the bill at Morgan Stanley the US government is about to start buying tons of banks all over the country the G7 and the seven big industrialized nations were meeting in Washington this week to finance minister  to this week they’re going to have some big decision. None of it has come to pass so far lol who knows by the time you listening to this podcast maybe on the stuff we don’t yeah in one hour we’re gonna hear from Henry Paulson it might be a boring old press conference with the seven remake say we’re moving off of money and moving to a Garden in Soekarno shelf. Whatever it is, you’ll find it here at npr.org/money will be following it even after we publish this podcast, and if you wanna know mortal deafly gonna block npr.org/money yeah, the other thing I’ve been getting from leaders all the time is a question about Fannie Mae Freddie Mac, and comes in different forms  Out there listening to John McCain and Barack Obama bat all over the campaign trail and this weekend. Our friends over this American life are partners really deep diving into the financial crisis again and you can hear the full show from PRI on public radio stations all over the country in the clip I’m just about to preview for you. I have a glass with another friend of ours, Charles Duhigg of the New York Times  a serious serious guy. He’s broken major views about Fannie and Freddie all year and I don’t necessarily get Fannie and Freddie all the way, but Charles Duhigg does you’ve probably heard by now in the last two years, the mortgage industry and then I’ll kinds of supreme mortgages, headed to hotspots novel kinds of mortgage, back securities album in the world Konomi  Spotify I’m going to politics Bob this last week on a radio show. We debunked an idea here a lot of Democrats these days Tiur Leon Republicans today we could go look at the other side of the aisle right into a point of republican dogma Democrats on Wednesday of this past week I attended anything Pennsylvania and I was amazed that nearly every person I talk to this Republican crowd was quite certain who is the culprit to work  Liberal Democrat in the house encourage in support of the notion that banks should should be providing loans to people who couldn’t afford them in inner-city wherever they saw the McCain regulations and they refuse to do anything about it. Boni Frank said no it’s OK no problem is it’s running great and here we are today , it’ll melt into thousand five Republicans to the prevented a lot of the mess that right now with a try to regulate with a try to fix it for the Democrats stop and a key to the whole crisis they say is the mortgage companies Freddie Mac Fannie Mae is a Fannie and Freddie at the center of the whole thing is John McCain at second president of the day  This fire was Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac. I bet you may never even heard of them before this, but you know they are the ones that with the Encouragement Center, Obama and his cronies in Washington afford to pay back question did the sub time crisis start with Danny absolutely not is the prime rate crisis did not start with is Charles Duhigg  pi to the Septi prices for the New York Times. He says it was not family and 39 but Walsky international investors brokers, thanks created and popularized subprime mortgages penny. Freddy didn’t get involved and seriously this huge surprise economy. Wall Street came in and they said we’re gonna basically by anyone anyone can make in Freddy  if that points for worse and worse, and that intern further fuels the growth of person so it started out as a kind of small brushfire that was worrisome was fanned overtime into a huge huge blaze and pinion Freddy horn in Porten part, but they didn’t create. They weren’t the single greatest input. They were part of the problem, unless allowed to regulate Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac back in 2005 as they want it , I was the one I was the one who calls at the time for title restrictions on Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac. I’m happening in the first place in the center Obama was silent on the regulation, a Fannie, Mae and Freddie Mac and his Democratic Congress pause every effort to rain the men what are they talking about? What what did Republicans try to do a couple of years ago so in 2005 a couple of Republicans introduced legislation that would place greater restrictions  Howard the regulator to basically have a tiger holder. Now it’s important to give me mine is John McCain didn’t actually sponsor that legislation. Initially, he came to it kind of your months and months after his been introduced in after being reported, come out send Fania for your terrible come, and everyone was kind of jumping on a John McCain, jumped on  if people have interviewed him in the Senate I said to John McCain was never a big deal, but if you want Fania Freddy, but he did cosponsor legislation deserve some some credit for that did you thousand five legislation to things personal would’ve cut the number of loans that anybody can hold for themselves so it would’ve avoided part of the problem. The Freddy is happening right now in theoretically, it might have caused Fannie Freddie to stop buying so many risky lungs, but that’s not a guarantee. In fact, it would’ve been completely up to the regulator, and the regulator who’s holding the position right now is the name of James Lockhart in the past year  in the past year he actually helped anybody buy more and more risky airlines because Congress over the past year started asking anybody to buy whiskey ones because I thought that would help McConnell right now it’s a part of a Republican orthodoxy. It seems that that if we had fixed Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac in 2005, we wouldn’t be in the crisis rain today  is that true that’s actually not true so if we fixed handyman Freddie Mac in 2005, the prices might be different, and it might be slightly less, but the crisis would absolutely still be here at circle talking point is is on the question of who associated with it considered, McCain said  he might have advised Samator Obama executors a Fannie, Mae, and Freddie Mac of advised him, and he’s taking their money for his campaign back. He’s receive more money from Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, and any other senator in history with the exception of the chairman of the committee overseeing an ad Lincoln, Barack Obama to Nl executive at  Franklin rate for advice on mortgage under extensive financial phone range made millions Barack Obama Franklin reign which is based on. Apparently Barack Obama and Franklin reigns once bumped into each other and ever get together. It went Barack Obama had one conversation very briefly once so it’s a little disingenuous to say that Franklin rangers advisor to Barack Obama know that , he said, did you find a money tree if you want to say who’s taking less or more money from Barack Obama it is absolutely true is the second highest recipient of logging dollars from Fannie Mae and Budi you’re the reason why with John Makena saying is a little disingenuous is because his campaign manager, John McCain‘s campaign manager again and Rick Davis was a lobbyist for Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac and took over $2 million from them in logging fees it to run this group to bed, put together to try and fight back against more  Regulation and in fact all those other Rick Davis left his firm when your joints in the king campaign, his firm that he still owns a pardon, was receiving payments from Freddie Mac until earlier this year, right yeah yeah I think it I think it ended in August and August done I’m not certain exactly the date. In fact, I work on the story of breaking up and what they said the reason why family and Freddie Mac are paying Rick Davis, Jonathan campaign manager, because I want to access to John McCain. They thought that maybe you can come president Sunday  Would be good to be friends with a guy who’s one of his closest eight general transferred. It says it’s true that Republicans have tried to rain in years and it’s true that in general Democrats go to Danny ready to take on mobile airlines and push through spending low interest rates go to the house and grow and sausage  Through the Republicans pot regulation of financial markets. This is none of that. It’s the overall trip to say that either party hat, great foresight is completely untrue. Both parties deserve a great deal of blame for what happened with the prince and the tramp in the blame on one party or the other really much is the issue a crisis like what’s going on right now? Can’t develop without everyone if you mean we’re looking at , the biggest crisis in a century that only happens when basically everyone drops the ball so there’s enough blame to give to both parties when it comes down to specific individuals some individuals deserve a lot more claim and others couple weeks talking to people who are especially good or especially bad with Barack Obama and John McCain either of them especially great especially careful. No Barack Obama cares about a whole bunch of other things then , John McCain cares about a whole bunch of things besides 10 minutes spent most of their careers talking about things besides Fannie Mae, Freddie Mac, etc. a big issue for them. Thanks so much to Ira glass and art good friends and partners of Chicago Public radio is this American life here that show all weekend long on public radio international stations near you go to dislike.org. Thanks also to Charles Doohickey , also a good buddy Haris he’s over at the New York Times know of the other thing we can hang a lot of attention to behind the scenes we haven’t talked as much about on the podcast is the exact mechanism how the US government is going to buy these troubled asset toxic waste of this treasury department is gonna spend $700 billion on. How would we not a garage sale? It’s not a garage sale  in from the garage sailing away as a David Kebon Mal Adam found out he talk to one of the guys who is on the forefront of creating the kind of auction that the government is going to use is it just by having the auction will actually start trading these toxic mortgage back securities again say that did not make a lot of sense to me. I had a long discussion with Larry, awesome bell University of Maryland. He’s working on design for the auction and he gave me this example of a tiny market that was stuck  in Boston personally it was because no one knew what things were worth and then it got unstuck and I know this isn’t really relevant but I have to tell you that Larry Asavela has this excellent big walrus mustache suppose you want to hat suppose that there are 20 houses for sale in your neighborhood and none of them have sold in the past year. What’s your house worth  Know any good ways of doing an assessment of it no no anyways of appraising it if there are 20 for sale and no transactions are occurring yeah OK kk out of the bricks and Ecy like it’s on the bricks there you go that’s why you’re not in the car where are we to continue the analogy little bit more and I moved to Washington yes, the last hit in the real estate  The house that we ended up buying it was one of two houses on a short live both of which have been on the market for over a year but perfectly lovely houses but both at asking prices of a really unrealistic and we wanted one of them, and we made with the seller Shirley to use as a really Loboa her at all  With a lot lower than what they wanted. We bought the house and a few weeks later the other ones sold also another essentially exact same price. The whole motion is he wants something out there that does verdant Hannah basketball price discovery and once there is a price discovery then that’s why you’re saying once this auction is done then maybe the market will functional it’s like you’re saying that that even machine still works at Welly  Market something used for thousands of years it’s not the suddenly in 2008 markets of Permanente sister operate. It’s a manner that the situation among us as well of the situation among Morgan’s holders is bad right now and that has resulted in the market, setting that it’s not going to be a permanent phenomenon and the better the market could unfreeze the better little bit  Are worth something right anything it’s worth something they’re all to be someone’s going to the market for being treated right using what is the sun is real on yeah so that serve you are securities that are certainly worth and appreciative of that. Perhaps they’re worth $.60 on the dollar but nobody really knows what they’re worth. Why isn’t the market to be out there they have the model , they’re all terrified to buy. They don’t know what price to pay and I have to say not. Everyone agrees that the auction will unstick the market for mortgage back securities. I was talking to Eric mask and it was a Nobel prize winner in this particular area study and he says that it’s possible that after the auction people will still not want to trade these things they still may have very different ideas of what the mortgage back securities stay home are worth and in fact, he says it’s possible to step left after the auction may be the things people disagree about the most so he says hard as it is to believe after the auction they’re actually making less of a market for trading these out mortgage back securities. Thanks, David Kebon, YouTube  Planet money is David customer get a hard time there for nothing. He is a PhD in particle physics from Harvard is on the team to discover the top 10 Costello joins us now a good damn you are a former business reporter with the Los Angeles times yet and you are heading off to graduate school at Columbia here in New York and you’ve been a fabulous blogger my wife , so what are you up again? So today we took a question from Elizabeth Jen Shelton, NPR station in Texas and she wanted to know something luck could credit time with my mortgage in a common ask me for money today all at once so no Mika thatfill The know they can’t just say give us all the money today when I talk to you , but check it out. We checked it out so we call Diah professor at Wharton known as the mortgage professor mtgprofessor.com‘s name is Jack Jack. Good day well, it is not in a number of years but I’ve been getting that question recently myself, precipitated by something the lender might be selling the loan that the bar was low and that generates the anxiety about what should happen with the new lead and what you’re describing is this process where it is the original lender of many Mortgages  Sold those mortgages to other people and then they were securitize into stocks and held all around the world. Yeah, the time they weren’t the borrow it will get a notice at some point that ownership of the loan has been transferred and would never leave that routine but in a in the current state of the world, something like that can trigger anxiety because the borrower wonders well and the new lender to  or something that perhaps the other lender the original lender wouldn’t do a problem arises when they get a notice that although the ownership of the loan hasn’t changed, the lender has engaged someone else in and that generates anxiety I got a letter this morning from from someone who had a loan  Standing like who wrote you down he was worried about whether or not the lender could change the index adjustable rate mortgage. He was worried because he has use LIBOR, which is the treasury and computers thing with that is that I bought at LIBOR is the London, London interbank, offering raiders tied to the rate that other on loans that they make the whole wage , Udas is very low risk realign and many many mortgages, and credit cards and student loans are tied to LIBOR is the interest rate that affects everything everybody who has a loan guy who wrote me at his loan, and was worried about whether or not it might be the light or because the LIBOR rate of diverged  Anyway, the questions is no shit happen the the borrower who has a loan in good standing as a contract and the lender, no matter who it is no matter who it is tied by the country so they’re not vulnerable to with a man alone do not vulnerable to a decision by a lender that is going to be rich raise  to the lender saying that they from treasury to LIBOR because it bad I mean we are still a nation under law and the law of contract so shut the side no matter what happens to the lender. Hey yo Nl Jog Shelton, don’t worry you’re OK willing to his column at npr.org  is in through email Twitter Facebook group I’ll throw that up in this podcast block. You can always ride to us it planet money npr.org started earlier today in Mediacorp (Spark) it came running in because you guys you guys panhandler and we went down We found him on 42nd St., just at Times Square are you sitting against the wall , you notice 30s live dirty blonde brown hair Spradley average black duck three bucks in the hat and he had with him aside and that’s fine. Did make this guy was meeting. What is Ron Martin in my sign says I will be spending my panty when camping so as to focus on the national economy, I don’t think I think the market is probably the , most of the problem but I think we have enough people in this country globally who are new from the stock market who are going to basically pull us money, so what’s the last money you spent the last money I spent probably on beer, beer and chips what kind? And how much snow? I got coffee and coffee and a bagel this morning but you’re a room by Budweiser anymore but I think I got Coors remember how much it was yeah  Dollar 50 for 24 ounce so I had to take today are these days have you noticed a difference it hasn’t been too bad it is been pretty good. I’ve gotten a couple people in by the side from big big soul copies of this song yes that’s that’s enterprise , I got 20 bucks for the sign. A great picture of the guy Ron Martin Turner blog thank you Laura Kaitlyn that’s a wrap for planet money for today. We will be broadcasting from my living room on Monday seriously Columbus Day I don’t want to come all the way in the sky Avenue we’re gonna bring you all the news for the weekend. OK don’t miss hourglass and Alex Bloomberg special reporting on this American life this weekend for Chicago, public radio and watch our block will be updating that all weekend  at NPR die/money. I’m Adam Davidson and I Laura Conway thank you for listening. 

----
