---
title: 081001) Lawmaker Pushes No Bailouts Act
date: 20081001
tags: #PlanetMoney
citation: "“Planet Money,” _NPR_, 2 Juni 2023. [https://www.npr.org/podcasts/510289/planet-money](https://www.npr.org/podcasts/510289/planet-money) (diakses 4 Juni 2023)."
---

Rep. Peter DeFazio has his own answer to saving Wall Street. The Oregon Democrat calls his bill the "No Bailouts Act." He says the method has been proven to work and could cost almost nothing.

----


Support for this NPR podcast in the following message come from better help online counseling by licensed professional counselors, specializing in issues including depression, stress and anxiety is it betterhelp.com/money to learn more and get 10% off your first month hi and welcome to NPR planet money podcast on Laura Conaway day is Wednesday, October 1. It’s about 5:22 PM in New York. I did news today hasn’t happened yet U.S. Senate plans to go to later With the White House fill out bill it’s still $700 billion but now it’s also text Poswa Busines is in certain individuals now just a minute we’re going to hear from the member of Congress was putting a different bill because of the new bill out at first call Noble is a doctor in the making. He’s a med student at the University of Ohio and he’s borrowing his way to school. I’ve been there, but not quite fond of the circumstances. Well, I guess I am a concern Is  in about how little Aldhita, Jog 9 probably gonna affect my daily life megalodon a lot of money and taking out the year that I have an agent gonna have trouble getting loans for my for an answer to Carl’s question we turned on the cabinets she wrote a book called generation debt, and she follows the student loan market really about as close as anyone Anya over the summer the talk of the credit crunch started  in a place where I used to be able to go and get a student loan was no longer there that’s right in the end it was scary and it was a setting of the remains a very out there. They said 111 I will be to go to a lot of people , so he knows he’s large guy right thing they have so generally it’s not such a bad situation. Generally there’s not really credit called out the federal government. What’s the safest route to go for a Sudirman Barat well, you know I want to the fan and I don’t know directly from my life and I do you have a building directly there if it’s directly, and there are more battery power , so Carl are you cabinets? Author of generation that says full speed ahead no, it’s turned a representative Peter DeFazio has his own idea about how to save a nation to Konomi. He’s a Democrat Oregon he’s pushing what he calls the no bail out at because you’re says he got a lot of his ideas from William Isaac Isaac ran the FDIC during the 1980 Savings and Loan crisis. I asked Defazio about his plan . This will require FDIC that’s the group that ensures bank deposit to implement a net worth certificate program. tell me about that Mr. Isaac 3000 examiners they look at all the assets of the bank and they determine whether the bank has any prospect of porn out so we still have. It’s the same thing some people didn’t like treasury secretary Paulson with the White House built I didn’t like the idea that the key alone with essentially get to decide who live in  Died. In this case we have an agency look at banks in the back like professional I didn’t work with the firm before affected if you were drinking buddy million dollars to buy what he want whenever you want and whatever Germany won if you’re a good friend problem is this like FDIC insurance for an entire bank of you could say that is probably a bit more complicated you might want to get  Explaining things fairly simply, but they are at the top of the graph. Thank you for making an 11th this exchange provide short term capital without cash outlay breakers the bank would be valued higher than its parent of current market value of but would’ve been done professionally that means it certainly have capability of lending. The number one step in your bill is that it would change what’s up  With Marc to market accounting yes can you explain for the average person to cover # to market current border bank is only allowed to value of them for today. They have a portfolio of the farm loan people that portfolio are paying your mortgage every month still have to value that as it because that’s what everyone saying no one wants to fuck right I think a better way if you don’t take it from the bank  Evaluation thing hire a whole bunch of people from all three payroll by the people in Mall III building thing. If you do this market market sell them that we would allow them fair market value accounting again this is hardheaded stop every day not the people self so-called liar lol , but this would free up a whole bunch of body. Can I say that back to make sure I understand so the bankers in other words would get a chance to look at their portfolio and instead of having to say it was worthless today because no one will buy it they could they could describe what they believe, is a fair value for those assets , off a lot of distress these days, a bakers who’s watching the bankers, setting down the value in the top of the FDIC. A lot of people are banks how much would your plane cost of potentially nothing because the FDIC which would be for corporation here when they have of the raise on all the member Bang , so in the worst case scenario, if the FDIC comes in and makes bad pets all of us that are in fact really on the edge, the money for that pay out for covering that loss come from money, recent other banks, or insurance info, and call Gillian borrow it by Upie F.H. ROY  Unbelievable power then you know about freeing up looking more at the firm and Morgan Stanley and he’s at the house what’s the near future for your bill? Well I’m working a Kali girl out there to get her father Vita, but that’s far we’re not on yet, so I’m not sure what’s going on. I hope it is  Captain of the package of every problem have you reached out to the Senate about this yet I talk to Cuplis senators about it. What are the things I think separates your bill from some of the previous conversation is it really seems to be about neither Wall Street nor Main Street yeah  Problem certainly is a problem borrow $700 billion and throw it at Walgreens Dimitri problem but we don’t borrow $700 billion and we want to help people stay in their home if we want to have real if we want to build infrastructure we want to put people to work  at the bar and capability Kevin borrow $700 billion and throw it at houses the big houses on Wall Street who’s gonna win does the money to pick me and that’s the planet money podcast for Wednesday, October 1 come back tomorrow for another dose always online at npr.org/money on Laura Conaway 

----
