---
title: 081003) Is the Bailout Worth It
date: 20081003
tags: #PlanetMoney
citation: "“Planet Money,” _NPR_, 2 Juni 2023. [https://www.npr.org/podcasts/510289/planet-money](https://www.npr.org/podcasts/510289/planet-money) (diakses 4 Juni 2023)."
---

In a special appearance with This American Life host Ira Glass, Adam Davidson wrestles with the $700 billion question. Plus: A talk with an advocate for a tax break on children's wooden arrows, and a currency analyst gets gloomier after news from Europe.

----

https://www.npr.org/sections/money/2008/10/hear_is_the_bailout_worth_it.html

Today on the Planet Money podcast:

Here's what you know: The revamped White House proposal for a $700 billion Wall Street bailout got approval from the House of Representatives today, in a 263-171 vote.

Here's what you may not know: That White House plan wasn't the only plan. It wasn't even necessarily the plan you think it is. In this podcast, Adam Davidson tells This American Life host Ira Glass about a mysterious phone call in which a tipster suggested that an alternate proposal had crept into the language of the reworked bill. Davidson says that it concerns so-called stock injection, and that economists like it — a lot.

Plus: David Kestenbaum talks to the guy behind the bailout's exemption for wooden arrows in children's archery sets. Jay McAninch, president and CEO
Archery Trade Association, ArrowSport, and Bowhunting Preservation Alliance, tells us the tax break is misunderstood.

And we chat for a moment with Win Thin, a Brown Brothers Harriman currency strategist who changed his mind this week about the world economy.

Download the podcast; or subscribe. Follow our Twitter feed.


Support for this NPR podcast in the following message come from better help online counseling by licensed professional counselors specializing in issues, including depression rest of anxiety is it betterhelp.com/money to learn more and get 10% off your first month and 63 days or 171 emotion is adopted on the table hi welcome to NPR podcast today’s Friday, October 3 5:03 PM here in New York. I’m Laura Conaway that noise you just heard was the sound of $700 billion Wall Street fill out bill today Dawin, the S&P 500, each bell of our friends on Twitter home/planet money but really we’re just talking about a couple of person toys here nothing like them  Big 778 point plunge we saw on Monday at the house earlier version of the rescue. Yeah I’ll come to work on figuring out exactly what this novel shoes you know play money is a collaboration with this American life. Adam Davidson sat down the whole glass to talk today  Language your conversation is part of a special edition of this American life. It’s airing this weekend is the second special edition be done. The first was in May here Adam and Ira this morning starting off with a question for Melissa an email on Wednesday will your Ira, Alex, Adam and gang  You are our only hope please do it so that clearly explains the question should we support the bail out? Answer is no whether options we have an Adam or Wasey house or read a mini there’s so much confusion out there I really don’t know who to trust and realize there’s only one source of information I trust without question , please help us understand this to Adam. Yes, what’s the answer? Is the bail out a good idea or not let me say what is clear crystal clear to me after spending the last several weeks from nothing but reporting this crisis it is a severe and scary crisis and the more I report it more scared I have it is also clear than spending $700 million will help you throw $700 billion a problem you’re gonna make the problem , but it’s also very clear that the plan we’ve been hearing all about the Paulson plan has a lot of problems. There are a lot of things that a lot of people do not like it is run through some of the big ones yeah so some of the big thing the main thing is, there’s all the crappy assets the banks don’t want and the US government is about to buy them and so we’re about to be the proud owners of $700 billion of crap  Also absolutely no price that is the cause of this crisis. These assets are not moving. These are these mortgage related investments that no one is willing to buy it when you can’t buy anything you don’t know what the price of the definition government is gonna have to make up a win a price, and if they go too low, they’re gonna ruin. The banks are going to give them too little money to save them  to make the problem worse if the government pays too much well pair has lost out a lot of money so you have to find this magical price that no one knows what it is so it’s really really yes it is a very circuitous way to solve the problem. the problem is banks, don’t have enough money, lending money and it’s freezing up  Here Konomi, and this is a very complicated way to get money in another way to do a whole different approach that lied to. The kindness is better in a bunch of been serving as many cards as we can find calling reading them and never get a whole lot of  Agree on anything but I would say of survey that I mean left-wing right wing libertarian more progressive a clear majority of the ones we serve well over a half for another. Don’t like to talk and plan is the best plant-based other thing a Tick-Tock how does this phone work  And what we’re doing is giving $700 million to go to the bank and then return to get all the action plan. We still give something like $700 million in the bank but in return we get a ownership share of the Mac we get to become  a government because of stockholders in owners of the banks avoid that whole crazy pricing of mysterious problems because you get a $10 billion chair in the bank simpler mathematical problem. Also a lot of the field is a better deal because plan that we don’t know what they’re worth all of that in the stock injection plan  Per stock, which means basically, the taxpayer is the last one to lose money that the shareholders of the bank would lose their money before we tax elected we’re more likely actually make money out of the steel and less likely a better. Why would we do that you’re a bunch of people  Against it would be group is fundamentally in their gods. Don’t like the idea of the US government owning shares a private company smells like Socialism to them and they cancel but maybe more importantly banks, really really hate look at what happened to Edi with the government did lately bought a huge share of the Mac. They all because zeroed out the value of the ship so all the current shareholders of AIG just lost billions of dollars  Virtually nothing and the government fire fleetly took it over like that I like that these guys end up getting punished yeah that’s a ladder that’s not just a moral issue or a political economic issue better when people pay the cost for bad decisions and the Holton plan doesn’t do that  Respect if this is absolutely a no-brainer give you two options come and give you 1000 bucks and I take all the crap out of your basement and you get to keep it at the bottom. The other option is I come and give you 1000 bucks and I get to move into your house I become a co-owner of the house I might get to kick you out of the house and take all your stuff I mean for the bank  And the bank lobby is a powerful huge lobby. You could just imagine how many and they are over 600 professional lobbying groups thousands of people are working hard to promote the path and plan any Stöckinger but we can edit well that’s what until last night and Friday morning at 11:20 at 11:20 waiting for the house to vote  Everyone for the hill is simply Nada last night. I was in my cabin in a cab on the way home. I got a call from the guy I know it’s pretty well-connected right around midnight and he told me guess what is in the Senate bill that was passed and it’s in the house. I woke up this morning and I still could barely believe it  Morning possible over the course of the morning I got more and more confirmation and basically what happened is someone and we still don’t know who put in very subtle language into the deck is this as an option buying the crappy poor idea the ability to do it in their overall get back to the original question. Should we support the plan , it is not hyperbole to say that there is a severe financial crisis all these dire warnings you’re hearing this is this is not Roski fat cats. This is serious this week we saw the prices spread to Europe, which I’ve been saying that they were glued to it. It’s already sleeping out to Main Street or whatever  Telling you about the majority of Economus. I am talk to you severe going to get worse. Something needs to be done. The original plan was not great. This plant is a lot better. This plant is probably the best we can get something Hass to happen sooner than thank you for another fight me how are yeah  That was a Adam Davidson speaking with this American life, post Ira glass on our blog, I started a thread about the stock injections provision I think I found part of the language npr.org/money Kestenbaum text look at one of the stranger corners of the new BLM redemption for the makers of wooden arrows  I guess you call him archery advocate he says, misunderstood him to the newspaper this morning and looking at the blogs, one particular subject of interest and occasional ridicule. Was this line in the mail out, filled with a exemption from a tax for wooden arrows can you explain with that I can really disappointed to see how many media I’ll let you run through there , almost none of the x-ray techs are currently exist on all air thousand five when the packing all arrow in the language wasn’t quick enough to catch it because it ended up passing the toy road the wooden and fiberglass be there I would have a cost five cents a pack  in the other garage dollar originally meant for Addmore expensive arrows Olympian or an archery shoot or the shoes recreationally or a bow hunter would use or even 38. $8.12 $ $15 that’s like a 5% tax on them. That’s the kids are as it was like a 50% tax  Really double the cost of doing business in this particular situation, athletic league, boys and girls club to get the kids recreation is this a $1 million provision estimated from current production he wanted to million rupiah half million of these arrows sold United States of me, in fact, a total production sold in this country would, and all those in the market  we are here now it seems like Jireh Stargell bill going through Congress well and if it’s not a place in Busines, that’s J Mac, and then she is CEO and president of the archery trade association by the way the tax on those arrows goes to state wildlife organizations that we had a long email exchange accurate and yes, in addition to benefiting church groups in Boy Scouts the exemption  Manufactures of Children’s Hospital. The tax goes away down here. Finally, I caught up with one of my favorite currency and his name is Winston. He works with brown brothers on Monday, financial details about how the dollar in the renminbi shallow in brief it over by the middle of next year and then on Thursday, he sent out a note saying a downturn is likely to be deeper and more prolong  About Europe go to the doctor for Epha Baylor rescue hero health is wealth pan that’s a role-play status quickly know the timeframe of the belt definitely open the question thank you Windu so you guys out there asking about Gunung travel in Europe us and that’s the planet money podcast for today October 3 era for a special with this American life this weekend this American life.org we are at npr.org/money on Laura Holloway take care 

----
