---
title: 081006) Whole Globe Says Ouch
date: 20081006
tags: #PlanetMoney
citation: "“Planet Money,” _NPR_, 2 Juni 2023. [https://www.npr.org/podcasts/510289/planet-money](https://www.npr.org/podcasts/510289/planet-money) (diakses 4 Juni 2023)."
---

Stocks in Europe tanked enough to make America's trading freefall on Monday look not so bad. But don't be fooled. The global economy needs a fix. It's just not necessarily going to like the medicine.

----

This message comes from NPR sponsor KPMG revolutionize your enterprise with a yacht KPMG can help you harness the power of AI to unlock its potential in the liver grow more it read the kpmg.us/NPR or Regina capital of what we were looking to do was to raise capital after week Which I am welcome to NPR is planet money I’m in Adam Davidson a Chris with more Conway tough day out there sure was today is Monday, October 6. It is now 6:02 PM in New York in New York. It was from representative Betty McCollum of Minnesota, giving it really hard to Richard Food fold is the former CEO of Lehman brothers who watch the old firm. Collabs turns out that was not the worst thing to happen to Richard Forbes recently. CNBC reported today to write wima Lehman Brothers  Him for bankruptcy. Richard Ford went to the company had a little work out and punched him and reportedly knocked him out. They were so angry CEOs of US treasury department today. Released its initial plan for fixing this whole mess of it. They started to let us know how they’re gonna spend at $700 billion chef they gave and we also learned who’s gonna be the boss of the project is Neel Kashkari 35 year old thunder Kent, who works for treasury secretary, Henry Pulcinella’s the treasury department, and he worked for him before it Goldman Sachs were possible , meanwhile it has been ugly gay for stocking for sure. No 800 points before skirting upwards again and ending 360 points down. I generally don’t it’s not my favorite index finger today were phones gluten thousand factor 1999 levels everywhere was down Asian markets were down similar levels in Europe. It was really ugly after a weekend of just rim, economic news, and a total failure of the European countries to to reach a unified approach to solving the crisis  Far John Macy is Deputy Dean law school he’s had enough to walk us through. Just wanna jump in for 20 New York Stock Exchange just closed for the people who haven’t seen it. It was a pretty gruesome day for stock market around the world credible. I was in Italy, one week ago and the attitude over there was  Basically a USO prime problem in in in your work in Methuen quickly the movie world is moved out from under ocean this morning. People woke up in Asia and started selling stocks very quickly. We had a horrible day here in New York but you were saying a good day compared to some other foreign stock  Giving the European the reason for that is that has been to our financial crisis of the population even about governmental response of the European European Union supposed to make responding to this kind of thing easier we have in Europe is that problem is the huge emergency emergency and I want to just cut you off track this week. We are in a Jordan free zone here at planet money OK and I hate it in my view fiscal policy and monetary policy that’s jargon that’s not helping people who aren’t Deputy jeans  Necessarily know and I am I’m gonna take the lead on this monetary policy is what the Denver 90 do and cut it down to the bare minimum. It’s basically they get to decide how much money various in this school policy how much money there is let means they move the interest rates up and down but the process by which the move it up and down, they actually put more money into the market or take more money out of the market  Doesn’t monitor no Cisco policy yes everything is pending in the amount of money. You always talked about monetary policy right so so in the US, you can actually see Ben Bernanke and Henry Paulsen. Normally these two jobs will be very separate. You want to keep them separate coordinate from time to time, but the idea is that the central bank will be said will be an independent of politics organization of the treasury sector is obviously political appointee , where is in Europe the Ben Bernanke of Europe is Jean-Claude Trishas, the European central bank. He sort of is in charge of all the euro sees the money of all the Garozzo but then each country has their own Henry pulse of their own people, and and and with her , so that’s what’s got you scared the fact that they are not responding in German and Italian finance minister still agree all right let’s move to what I’m holding in my hand with you process for selecting asset, managers, interim guidelines for conflict of interest basically what I’m talking about is what the treasury department issued today  The most we’ve learned yet on how they are going to spend our $700 billion account in total 3456, pages five but that’s not what you normally expect in a government report. Original blossom to do about Ford and 80 pages started out at three so  Are you seeing in there? You’ll be fine now we wait I want to stop you right there that that was one of the sensors the crap Maya and this is the third paragraph financial agent asset managers will be financial agents of the United States and not contract. That seems like a very important distinction but I don’t understand OK  is that people will be part of the government work for the government contractors ages performing work quickly on behalf of the government in it and that it in these people are in the ladder what is what is that mean this is gonna be a guy does that mean they all work in DC you make it up  That I can’t shoot I like this in the word business in a word with John Macy Nl, but is so that means that there’s gonna be a trading Deas or several trading desk in New York that has been a private enterprise training desk for years. it’ll look the same will have their Bloomberg terminals and it will be a bunch of them , New York guys are long-term traders, but they are going to be official agents of the US government is Marshall does that trouble on behalf of the government the same guy as well for me personally toxic waste in their portfolios Pak to meet what has been one of the four problems in this whole debate and that is it no one involved in it can agree on anyone else is it in neutral after we look at her neck you say you know you’re working for Busch not a neutral actor  Work for Goldman Sachs not a neutral actor in here. We have the people carrying it out again we question what is no I’m gonna I’m not holding him I have a different document. This is the interim guidelines for conflict of interest ran about unimpressive a surprise so then we go down and here’s what here’s how are you , we are appropriate treasury may obtain nondisclosure agreements and conflict of interest agreement in advance of supplying an offer. I think that means you have to sign a document saying if you find inside information they could making millions of dollars idea here by and if you don’t have their formulas, you could use them to make a lot of money for the firm. If they have that information how much could someone make? If they really just sit here I’m gonna go for it I’m gonna make a fortune , if they decided to go probably what is what’s your gut sensor your pure professional expertise does the signing a nondisclosure agreement mean well Hué I would I would take $100 million but I guess I just can’t view it. It depends on the integrity of the person people in the world and they will  And they will live up to the spirit of the document there. A lot of other people who are quite a Dengan in honors monitor in it, so it really depends on people you’re dealing with now that was John may see if he’ll law school trader named Tom corona. He works in Norman Hatton, his IQ for me  a Terminal to study what’s happening in following the moves in Europe over the weekend takes a different approach from John Macy John Macy thinks you’re good. We’re in a lot from you the other one America Irish government last Tuesday to five topic. Patient guaranteed all deposits, institutional ethical positive money and so here we have that rate of $100,000 per per person and 50,000 correct  That’s weird so there’s a number if you have $10 million in the bank we’re covering it correct deposit the normal circle 500 million here is not right now in the bank and the German bakery follow their lead all last night hold it close to follow all the EU member thing  And then you’ll probably have a UK follow serve following you have a choice as of 500 Ludology, you and all of the major remember we’re talking about the top 25 to 50 world needs a major center of financial aid to play ranch that would be free. Italy would be beautiful. Dito for Australia would be Australia, New Zealand bank, United States use Bank of America all the top 25 football record has branches  All the major money in London New York over if your investor and do you want to hide money is it to the CCD banks the bank that has a job in guarantee and one that does it follow this model otherwise eventually come out of their bank it states when we first got everybody together. We argued about it for a couple weeks in the past is 700 billion now  We’re gonna buy a bad asses and maybe even get a bison in Europe. They’re having a true financial crisis and their response to different from ours. Call Edi plan which I don’t. I actually did European model right now in the long run into the work out much better thank you I really think that really cost nothing other than the government guaranteed deposit  Look at the bank to make sure you know the deposit correctly as the monies would have Yuseva products but the banks really use the deposit working the money they can buy will be they want thank you need to be Wednesday would be fine until that happens out to see to competing ways of solving event prices side-by-side European way in the American way. Yeah I think  Really eat all the way down the larger and finally we pulled up listener David Greiner of Birmingham Alabama question for coming out. People should still need the money in the next five years station very thorough and huge but I guess my question is is it right in perfect example of yelling fire in a crowded theater that we could not be doing Adam well, I’m gonna see if I always do. We are not a personal finance shell we do not give personal financial advice and you wouldn’t want it if we gave it yeah you wouldn’t wanna work for public radio like I would see what most I’ve read 1 million , I’ve talk to a lot of experts on it a general rule no matter what’s going on in the market should not be a place where you have your money that you need in the next few years 3 to 5 as a general rule stocks you should give stock some time to deal with rapid ups and downs. My understanding is in the history of stocks in the US there have been five year. And I believe a few tenure. Or stocks have gone down for that period of time my understanding , there is never been a 15 year period or 20 year. Which stocks have gone down they’ve always gone up when you give them out and turn my keys 38. I’m just putting my money in the purse. I’m putting my money in my 401(k) profit every paycheck and you know I’m actually very happy that I’m buying stocks at a discount , to be happy I think as a general rule no matter what’s happening in the market. If you really know you’re gonna need that money in the next 3 to 5 years, not not to have them in the stock market when markets go way down people panic and they sell like crazy. It’s Jim Cramer help in the panic. Yes, Jim Cramer in my view is helping them I think that a reasonable plan a reasonable portfolio would be one that has some more conservative investments, Tamark rest of investments, something to work out with your personal finance advisor based on your age  or comfort level with your goals but the general idea that the market has just lost in the last week you know whatever it is 15,000 15,000 million points and you were going to sell now and wait until it’s going up a recipe to sell low and buy high. That’s never a good idea  And all right I’m just gonna come outside don’t listen. Thanks for the question David Greiner that is the planet money podcast for today October 6. Send us your question if you’d like us to call you we are npr.org/money you can also send the emails that planet money on NPR work I’m Adam Davidson , take care 

----
