---
title: (080916) What's the Deal With Lehman and Merrill
date: 20080916
tags: #PlanetMoney
citation: "“Planet Money,” _NPR_, 2 Juni 2023. [https://www.npr.org/podcasts/510289/planet-money](https://www.npr.org/podcasts/510289/planet-money) (diakses 4 Juni 2023)."
---

The financial world — and more to the point, the rest of us — woke up Monday morning to a whole new Planet Money. Lehman Brothers filed for bankruptcy. Merrill Lynch sold itself to Bank of America. And the questions came pouring in. We answered as many as we coul d in 22 minutes.

----
Support for this NPR podcast in the following message come from better help online counseling by licensed professional counselors, specializing in issues including depression, stress and anxiety is it betterhelp.com/money to learn more and get 10% off your first month night I’m Adam Davidson here with Laura Conaway hi Ari this is the planet money podcast. This is our third podcast and this time we’re going to answer questions about this unfolding financial crisis I guess I should say it is Monday, September 15 at 2:50 Lehman brothers is declaring bankruptcy today. The stock market is down considerably, but for all we know other things haven’t folded since we are talking now, but we think most of answers old applied for the foreseeable future. They were written questions adamant I’m just gonna farm away and you go fast all right this is from Ginny and said she’s not in the banking industry doesn’t trade stocks consider self an average worker with average 401(k), trying to pay back student loans. Can you explain how the events of the weekend affect an average Jane like me and how should I respond I was a The of events over the weekend Lehman brothers declared bankruptcy Merrill Lynch, selling itself to Bank of America. In the last minute panic move. These don’t really affect you, and are unlikely to affect you in any serious way. They do in someways make the whole global economic system feel a little less stable, and in other ways they make the call economic system slightly more stable  Can get into later, but as unless there is some global systemic crisis, which is unlikely but possible unless that happens it really isn’t an effect for you so I think unless you’re curious about it you can feel free to ignore it for now. All right Jenny chill from Reno. I feel very sorry what are other firms doing? Why don’t they help women well firms wanna make money and so if there’s a way to make money by helping women, they would do it they were asked to help leaving all the major banks in America were asked to help Lehman. They couldn’t figure out a way to do it, and make money  But simply firms are not in the business alpha depot, right there’s another one from Adam from Adam to Adam, what does this belong to a bank that appears to be teetering on the brink i.e. Washington mutual should we open up a new account and deposit our paychecks elsewhere if you have FDIC deposits in a FDIC insured bank, pretty safe and you probably won’t even lose a few hours or at the worst did lose a few hours of access to your money. If you have things like a mutual fund or more complex instruments, you shouldn’t lose those either there is the possibility of us drawn out process as there’s reorganization and shuffling around, so you shouldn’t lose your money, but you might lose access to your money for a little bit of time so  Yeah I guess it makes sense to if you’re worried about it move to another bank I don’t think Ted wants to know. How does this affect investment firms says my retirement money is Solomon, Smith Barney, and various stocks and bonds should I be worried you shouldn’t be worried if you owned those if you are part of a mutual fund if you like, I am if you invest money in a mutual fund, then you are an owner of that mutual fund they wouldn’t be caught up in a bankruptcy proceedings. You wouldn’t lose the money again there is a slight risk that you lose access to the money for. Days are  Weeks I guess, but unlikely if there was an untidy bankruptcy, followed by a process of some other company taking over but you should not be terribly worried of course if you want stock in a company like me and brothers well then the stock is worth a lot. What are you a stock and say made pretty bad. If you have lost your money will come back. I guess there’s a slim chance. Yeah, I mean that they’re talking about this period of time going through creative time and then the government has not made long-term decisions today permanently nationalize them today to set them on their feet and let them become companies again with the stock is worth so little. I can’t imagine there’s any point selling outside , OK what exactly this is from Rado Rado’s got a bunch of questions what exactly went wrong with Lita’s Lehman Brothers like most of you big bacon banks has a lot of farms doing a lot of different things. They have no trading desk that are trading stocks and bonds all over the place they have  Should’ve mortgage wholesale packaging arms to take mortgages. You buy a whole bunch of mortgages from him from smaller banks in package them, and then sell fonts. You should listen I guess to make this American life story with Alex Blumberg that that explains that it took us an hour to explain it all so I’m not gonna get into the whole thing now with Lehman did which is Franklin what does investment bank is not supposed to be  I think of them as like a baleen whale you know they kind of sucks they move through the economy they don’t like 15 tons of plankton for eating 15 tons of plankton a day and Nl and pooping in a healthy other side. If you think of a regular back, you know the it’s a wonderful life cut it back a depository institution they take savings deposits from one group of people, and they land that money to someone else. Bank of America, most banks, for like that, but investment banks are different beast all together they don’t actually have deposits for the most part, but they do is there a middleman they find someone else with money and someone else who needs money and they they marry them and they they tell them how to use each other’s money and they get a little piece of the pie self. They’re supposed to stay away from risky investment by just serving as a middleman to help to other people who won who has money and wants to make some interest in the other one who needs some money and is going to pacemakers Lehman did something  Thing that now seems pretty stupid. They held on to some of the riskiest assets. These were these were subprime related assets, the word for these particular kinds of toxic waste. These are considered the least valuable most risky assets but there are Lehman brothers Norton. Normally you would think we just sell those to someone else who wants toxic waste and believe it or not, there are plenty of institution  Want toxic waste high risk but it’s also hybrid turn Lehman held onto them. We’re not sure if they hold onto them on purpose cause I wanted to sell them to anyone or other things are closer downfall but that’s the bulk of it. They took really big risks when they probably should not. Why did Merrill Lynch or Merrill need to go hunting for a buyer well, if you remember right after Bear Stearns collapsed immediately, everyone was saying about Lehman Brothers is Lehman Brothers  This is a natural thing that happens whenever a financial institution or any kind of institution does badly people start extras they said they have extra scrutiny of all the competitors in that same area so when Lehman brothers started on the road to collapse, it was clear that Merrill Lynch would be the next one year ago there were five major investment banks, Goldman Sachs, Morgan Stanley, Bear Stearns, Lehman, brothers, and Merrill Lynch where students went belly up. Everyone immediately started talking about Lehman brothers cause they were the sketchiest one lap, Lehman brothers girls they start looking for the Mexican fiasco  One which is Maryland so on Sunday if you came very clear to Merrill Lynch the people run Merrill Lynch if wima goes belly up, everyone’s gonna sue we’re gonna go belly up in addition on Sunday we learned that the Fed, the federal government and the Fed would not be allowed Lehman Brothers so lotta people  That they might bail out Lehman Brothers since I didn’t feel at Lehman brothers that are less likely to bail out Merrill Lynch Merrill Lynch is in a lot more trouble because of that so that’s why all of a sudden out of the blue on a day when it was him at Lehman brothers are suddenly also tomorrow just saw the situation to go to Ruth cover yeah otherwise today their stock would have likely collapsed and they would’ve his bankruptcy as soon as today  at all the white note still with Rottet why is AIG panicking you know I’ll be honest and this is kind of embarrassing. I’ve spent so much energy and on Lehman brothers and Merrill Lynch that I have not spent enough time so let’s table that table that who’s next one day I GHT the other two, Morgan Stanley and Goldman Sachs are considered pretty robust, pretty strong at this point the other banks by the way, the non-investment banks, Bank of America of America hey Chase, this people have they have real acetate. Have these deposits they are in a much safer situation that’s not to say everything‘s going great for them you know all financial stocks are doing poorly there’s Rizal 12 o’clock but investment banks are very special. Be what they really on at the end of the day is a bunch of really smart people in the trust that people have in they don’t really have anything else or very little else that’s the core of their value so once they lose that trust, they’re gonna post, but something like Bank of America, or or the many of the other thousands of banks in them  Erica are much safer cause a real assets Sam will collapse. There will be other pets please Keith wants to know about the bush administration, system, famous for favor, de regulation, i.e., allowing free market forces to separate winners from losers has this contributed to the worldwide credit crunch do you regulation this is a huge, huge, huge question and hotly debated that there’s a lot of discussion about the ways that the regulation contributed to the crisis I would say, without question there was dumb regulation there was regulation it wasn’t as sophisticated as it should be, I think more versus less to me isn’t helpful you can have a lot of regulation that’s pretty stupid. You have a small amount of regulation is pretty smart and targeted  But more appropriate regulation. Certainly we need that it’s possible that the last time in part of the problem is we have so much regulation with his dozens of they called in the alphabet soup of regulators. You know we have the Comptroller of the currency in the SEC in the bed and you know there’s all these different rules all these different bodies a lot of the rules going back to the 30s totally unprepared for a world of really complex financial instruments dreamed of by Harvard physics PhD‘s, so definitely we need smarter regulation and I think  That anyone would agree that this administration did not do a tremendously. Great job of moving that far forward although it’s not you know they have to work with Congress it doesn’t fall far, so do you want to table cushions from AIG for the most part right with a couple hear from people running if they’re going to get their death benefits or 403B stuff  I will say you know not a lawyer and not 100% sure of the lab at my my guess would be that they will definitely get the gas benefits insurance lies very very severe and it prevents you have to. I just buy briefly with furniture company and I wrote about insurance in the street briefly you do you have to have a reserve for all of your potential losses anyway, I would not worry about that. There’s a possibility of short term disruptions, but I don’t think that they would be a long trip actual loss of mine. Richard and Toby are requesting information about the last Grapeville out that occurred who and win  Well I mean the SNL, the SNL savings and loan in the recent past did the SNL Conor will 10 years ago there was long-term capital management that wasn’t me what happened there was the federal reserve bank of New York did not actually put any money into the deal they simply God, all the leading banks together quickly. The story there was, there was a hedge fund. It was some of the smartest people in finance in several Nobel prize winners of people who basically created the modern financial system. They created this incredibly complex hedge fund that  I don’t wanna get into the whole thing but basically was leverage meaning for every dollar they actually home but they were borrowing something like $100 and spread it all over the world and Israel complex trade. They thought that they had conquered risk which is also what people like lemon brothers die  Recently people thinking they conquered risk events, collapsing soon after the long-term capital management got itself into a position where they had their fingers and so many pies all over the world, that if they went belly up if they collapse that could cause a credit squeeze the world over the president of the New York Fed, at the time, got all of the major banks together, almost all of them agreed to help out. Bear Stearns was one of the notable exceptions to sit now we’re not helping everyone else, so they created a process to unwind as they say long-term capital management positions, being a bigger  Give them capital and give them time to Kamala die so unwanted equals die her well online I mean online to just be selling your position like if you want a lot of Amazon stock and you decided I don’t wanna own animals Amazon anymore. You might say I’m unwinding my Amazon position if you’re unwinding all of your positions them  Their questions from Maryland is there a possibility of a run on banks and what is the shadow banking system, so there is a possibility of a run on the Shadow Bay system there as well less of a possibility of a run on the actual, Becky sister Marie explain, so you know we’re a great depression was was huge crisis was caused by actual runs on, bet your bank in the world can survive a day if every single depositor showed up at the door and said I want my money now that’s like that famous scene in  Your life you know your money is in Laura’s house and Sarah‘s car and Frank’s business so it’s a new bank has 100% of its deposit on hand at all times otherwise locker so the US government created a whole bunch of devices to prevent future runs on FDIC insurance. Basically if you get nervous that your bank might run out of money you know that the US governments gonna come in and make your whole up to $100,000 per day so to regular banks it’s not a huge worry it started to happen a little bit with in the math a few weeks Ago  But the FDIC stand there and it was very orderly Process from what I understand. It wasn’t a minute to the bank was closed without giving money to people the shadow banking system so that the actual banking system it is Hal historically investment works in America savers, put money in their deposit account the bank lens that money out I don’t know if you remember from economics class a little arrow from household to banks to industry back to household, recycling, recycling cans yes, the shadow banking system is this whole system of investment that’s where its nobody actually  is nobody is owning a deposit and then lending out based on that deposit Lehman brothers is issuing bonds that are back by a series of assets that are owned by Merrill Lynch and Goldman sacks of JP Morgan, deutsche bank, and those assets and Turner controlled Parker generated by central bank of China in the central bank of Thailand and some bank in England, another bank in Argentina, in other words, if the system of really complicated financial instruments that move around the world without had a clear , it’s much less clears. Much is, it’s much harder, for let’s say a regulator to go to a book and look it up and say all right this banking system is this much money in this banking system phones that much money would have the Bear Stearns is basically the modern day equivalent of a run on the bank wasn’t that there’s turns ran out of money is that no major investment bank and survive a day without fresh pack of the constantly borrowing money every day every day that’s how they work for short term borrowing, and Bear Stearns lost the confidence of other people on Wall Street, and so no one would lend him money and they went out of business and the reason on Woodland the money is much like in a regular bank run . Everybody who Woodland, the money was worried that the other guy won’t my number and if the other guy doesn’t have the money and I do want the money but no one else on some money does collapse not lose my money so it’s a contagion a fever contagious when you give me a piece of homework and then I got a last question for you this is from Pauline this is your homework you wrote a piece today about Lehman brothers in with you she said basically that they were like the person who ordered a pizza and can’t pay for the pizza except it’s not just at the old money for the pizza they also owe somebody house can you just go to Pak and they’re a little bit as a question from Pauline in there about why they owe somebody a house all your questions coming this is really hard I wish you concentrate on Leo  After all this how can any saying or sensible American return a republican president in the 2008 national election this one gets me confused I mean it it it it seems that people are very quick to turn this into a Hardison thing which seems to imply the Democrats wouldn’t of let this happen that there’s a great book about the supreme crisis in one of the first book that came out call dad $1 trillion meltdown by Charlie Morris accident story about it for all things considered, and Charlie who happens to be a democrat as it happens, but that doesn’t matter has his lovely beginning where he explains the roots of our current crisis he goes  And it’s a very compelling very well written account. He goes back to the Johnson administration, talks about how Lyndon Johnson caused some of the put some of the events in place. Richard Nixon contributed Gerald Ford, Jimmy Carter, Ronald Reagan, you’re getting the picture this has the crisis. We are in now I do not see how you objectively look at all the contributors and come out thinking oh Republicans that’s who’s to blame I’d say the Bush administration I don’t know just roughly thinking maybe 8% of the blame 6% I mean like that single digit  in my I think that if you want to blame one person I think there’s a very compelling case of Alan Greenspan is to blame a man appointed by both Republicans and of course Bill Clinton. I think Bill Clinton. There’s a lot of responsibilities here and my responsibilities. I don’t even mean oh it’s his fault or it’s Bush‘s father. It’s push his dad‘s fault I don’t think anyone of these people sat down one day and said oh if I do this it’ll destroy the economy in 2000 80 what the heck I’m gonna do it nobody side nobody for saw it but people took a responsible Choices . People politicians always always put off tough economic problems of today and push them off into the future. that’s a political true. It’s whether a democrat or a republican is in power when I think through the Democrats and Republicans her to blame I have a very hard time even beginning to decide who Cuz more to say if you want to blame someone blame politicians Moin blame yourself. I think we are Citizens. We don’t demand more responsible economics for my Lita Adam that’s the list. Thank you Laura thank you for doing that was fun I hope your help and please send more questions for blog and theater org/Connor or two if you’re a little/money  Owed/money you’re right and global economy head NPR yeah I think we also know our planet money on NPR or so many ways to reach us if your dog/money come get it 

----
event don't really affect ordinary people, unless global systemic effect
firm can't make money from helping lehman brothers
access to money in bank in question may affected for some time
if have stock than the value will be low
lehman brother have a lot of part, they are investment bank, match lender to lendee
but lehman held on to riskier asset, normaly sell to those that want but they held
merrill lynch is competitor, the next. so if lehman bankrupt they might too
other bank also have real asset, so not too affected
quantity of regulation not important, effective, smarter regulation does
some hedgefund, create complex system, financial expert spreading risk and thought have conquered risk, and completely collapse, they have finger on too many pie in the world
there is a posibility a run on bank on shadow bank system
no bank can survive a run on US have FDIC insurance, regular bank not too worried
the chadow banking system, like lehman brother, that lending system that too complex because too integrated on global basis
all things considered, on crisis have multiple contributor, politician always put off hard things to the future