---
title: 080923) Bush Adviser Wonders - 'What Did I Do Wrong'
date: 20080923
tags: #PlanetMoney
citation: "“Planet Money,” _NPR_, 2 Juni 2023. [https://www.npr.org/podcasts/510289/planet-money](https://www.npr.org/podcasts/510289/planet-money) (diakses 4 Juni 2023)."
---

Economist Tim Adams worked under President Bush in the U.S. Treasury. He says traders didn't understand what they were trading, and regulators didn't see what was coming.'

----

https://www.npr.org/sections/money/2008/09/bush_adviser_ponders_what_did.html

This message comes from NPR sponsor. KPMG revolutionize your enterprise with a yacht KPMG, can help you harness the power of AI to unlock its potential and deliver grow more it read Dokt KPMG.us/NPR I am welcome to the planet money podcast I’m Adam Davidson here with Laura Conway damn Costello and Alex Blumberg hello today is Tuesday, September 23. It’s 5:34 PM Dan quickly where are we in the news Today is the Polson Bernanke receiving reception this was not the welcome to stay at. Hope the we’re going to just pass the bill that the president sent no matter what far from it. Yeah, it was about the timing of the wind timing of it and was Jim Bunning, and Pulisic. He was in full affect Rika? un-American , but we don’t know what the deal will look like we don’t have any. We’ve heard a lot of possibilities but we don’t yet know where they are. Yeah, at the end of a possum conduct out really stood firm and he didn’t give me exactly what he says he wants as he says to have this pass quickly get on the ground running and not be standby  And Laurie you just block something about the white something out of the White House yeah I did. There was Chris Gago phone call today Antoni Fredo, deputy press, chief of the White House said that quite hastily drawn together has been considered by any number of policy people actually for months to page yeah, the deposit because of this had been worked out by certain members of the policy staff for months , so we’re gonna play some interviews today yesterday got a chance to catch up with Tim Adams. He used to work for Henry Paulson Adams was under secretary for international treasury is now a private in private consultation with and with the Lindsay. I know you’ve been a close advisor to the president before he was president, right  Now and then you he worked hard to get them elected and reelected right track it you know it it looks like it is hard to give a huge ringing the doors economic policies. How do we wait? What did he get wrong way? I think everyone likes him for humans and you you certainly , I think we are where we are because of 20 or 30 years and some were made in as the.com tech Bubba which was the largest equity bubble if you took our system and we just think about how do you respond to them in here for them and that’s the real attachment  This week but next year they’ll wrestle with how do you build a new regulatory structure in the system for 20%? I feel like you’re dodging my questions I little bit I think there’s a lot of wrong and for a lot of the players I think they were a lot of regulatory at her job none of the consequences. Can you give an example well we play we lift the delivery ratios in 2004 when you , didn’t think about enough about what that bitch for the unregulated. I just explain what that means familiar that means if used to be in it if an investment bank had 100 bucks they could lend a 12 to one they could lend out the thousand 200 bucks then you lifted the restrictions and they could lend out 3000 bucks 30 to one which now at least  Looks like a dangerously highly leveraged. You had a lot of people who were fusions for buying and selling and in writing instruments and understand the complexity selfie with them and founding out. Is it management jelly and I am at we’re making love in Chipley sure that it was good quality windy. What did you get my person? What did you not understand? If you wish you could go back in time and tell yourself you know we we we look at the you look at the trees rather than this entire system and it’s easy trip  is easy for the different regulators to go into the entities be regulated, and he look at the typical practices to causing problems, but it wasn’t enough pages. The whole system question and system, so it would work itself out if there were problems, it would be a hint civic or just one node in the supply chain failed, and I think it was just we were , OK there’s a chance of one investment banker for banks, or whatever will collapse, but but that the whole system of money moving around the country and around the world that was fundamentally Sinta that was solid. Everyone knew what they were buying and selling in the day of the computer models  if you wanted this really capture the full range of risk in the berries Alka so cool that hail distributions it and it would they would understand what is different and complexity try wow wow you quit track of Adam you and I talked yesterday to Brad on formulations, and he is  And you bought a mansion so that you could ask him a very about one specific part of the proposed bill section 10 maximum amount of authorize purchases the secretaries authority to purchase troubled assets under the sac show me shall be limited to $700 billion outstanding at any one time and the main thing I want to get out of this conversation with you is how much is $700 million. How should we think about that and what will that do to the dollar to meet Her  Listeners what is 700 billion is that real money or is that play money from you know I know $1 million means nothing to them $100 million with nothing to 700 billion me nothing no it’s equal it’s more than you as well in portal for a year for your significant more even at these massive even at these massive prices it is so the government could’ve just bought us all week  if you want to sort of a simple visual out it’s equal to the entire US the people to the amount we borrow by any measure does anybody besides the US government have $700 billion in Mexico what US government doesn’t actually have $700 billion as he ability to borrow rest $700 billion  Due to promise with credibility three pay, someone $700 billion right but I’m yours out book at Exxon mobile Exxon Mobil OMG E they couldn’t that’s this is the song that beyond is this it is there’s no one company there’s no $700 billion together well, I’m in the oil industry probably will be the closest Cazuela  if he oil industry went out and borrowed a ton of money, took his entire profits borrowed some more from the banks were willing to enter welcome yeah then you could maybe mobilize a big investment big berry library‘s it means they have $1 trillion if you get a higher portfolio, is it a big part of that portfolio is a liquid  They can’t sell so often when I think of illiquidity I think liquid is cash in your pocket illiquid is your house is worth something but you can’t give it to someone to do a lot of stuff and it’s even worse in your house because this is assets claims on your house and since no one knows quite with your house for now they don’t really know a bundle of the mortgages. A whole bunch of different houses is worth so it’s like your house cute how many countries in Japan could borrow 700 billion in great Britain it be could they probably but it would be getting above 10% of the GDP well above 10%  Phenomenal song now he did say there is one country Alex if you remember one country that actually has 700 billion China could give us at 700 billion then I can still stagger by that entities on earth and only one of them actually has it throughout history as I understand it and maybe wrong, but generally the richest country at any given time being at one time Portugal, whole United Kingdom with United States. From a long time the rich country always had one what country  I’ve got a listen. Her question today with Julius Saint Paul Minnesota. She’s looking at the $730 bill out bill and she’s looking at one part of it. In particular the idea of holding her shoes were and I’m trying to figure out if there’s an economic . As executives walk away with all this money that’ll somehow benefit Bapak fair otherwise I can’t do the job question Leah and quickly to the argument it’s not that it’s benefits economy by giving these executives millions of dollars to spend on Septi argument is Hiten cut their Paden banks that are in the shaky position are less likely to participate because the executives aren’t gonna want to participate in this buyout because I don’t want to  Worry that’s well you know any business but if you were on the fence in a few companies look at a job or someone else right now, so they literally they will say that they’re worried about people saying screw it I don’t care about the global economy I don’t care about my own company. If I don’t get my $20 million walking bonus, I’m gonna go away  And sciences yeah and I don’t it’s not a moral well actually that’s not true Adam Smith Kali tomorrow is Maine bucks, but but but the point is not economics does not talk about the moral better parts of our nature and talks about our incentives and if you take away two for an individual to benefit themselves, it’s remarkable how easy it is for individuals  at the street level a lot of people would like to offer these bankers and then send it to me yeah and I also don’t feel like they’re in any sort of negotiation like you’re you’re you’re coming to the government for the government to bail you out basically and you’re gonna demand you know  he doesn’t like it from a purely economic point of you. It doesn’t seem like that right on a human. If you don’t pay money than six months or 12 months to you right clearly many people on Wall Street who make colossal errors I’m sure some of them are schmucks some of them aren’t there a fair amount of responsibility I think Fairmount of a problem , they’re talking about this tomorrow on the hill right from Megan get much farther on the issue then all right well this has been planet money podcast for Tuesday, September 23. I’m Adam Davidson thank you to work on her way down Costello and Alex Bloomberg we have so much analysis observations, funny stuff podcasts all sorts of stuff at npr.org/

----
