---
title: 080929) Now What, Congress Rejects the Bailout.
date: 20080929
tags: #PlanetMoney
citation: "“Planet Money,” _NPR_, 2 Juni 2023. [https://www.npr.org/podcasts/510289/planet-money](https://www.npr.org/podcasts/510289/planet-money) (diakses 4 Juni 2023)."
---

Stocks fell 778 points — the biggest point dro in one day ever — after the House of Representatives spike a rescue of Wall Street. A group of economists reveal how scared they are — and how scared they think you should be. The news is not great, but we haven't yet reached calamity.

----

Support for this NPR podcast in the following message come from better help online counseling by licensed professional counselors, specializing in issues including depression, stress and anxiety is it betterhelp.com/money to learn more and get 10% off your first month hi everyone welcome to NPR planet money podcast I’m Laura Conaway today’s Monday, September 28. It’s about 6:14 PM New York City and it is a doozy of a day Congress the house of representatives today just a couple of hours ago turned back to White House request for $700 million bail out Wall Street Dow Jones got green around the gills 778.01.220 $ in value gone Single point drop in a day we are at planet money. We noticed that going as planned attention we noticed people on twitterfeed.com/planet money also feeling a little freaked out what’s going on so he started calling the first one up David Hensley a global economy, Morgan Chase. How are you feeling? We’re still serve absorbing the news are you feeling happy scared, relieved sad  to see some combination of concerned a little bit scared, scared of what well on the hidden very fragile position. Here we already see signs of our momentum recently have shifted our call to end from the worry would be great talking about it that almost impossible to borrow money, whether it’s very short term, money, or longer-term money to finance their operations, and that would clearly have it , on the way off of workers layoff people that would be back in that wouldn’t again negativecircle and what you just described to me sounds like a standard issue. Recession a lousy thing, but but it happens there’s more unemployment there’s a slow down in that last for a period of time and then we go back up that’s not what we’ve been here. We’ve been hearing great depression we’ve been here here , well again I think it is in the eye of the beholder, right I don’t think everybody play out but what unusual right now it is literal care to paralysis take me to the credit market. This is not something we have any don’t really know what it’s going to be, but we feel like , if you think about this, but businesses might literally David I hear from a lot of people out there in our listenership who still say they don’t know whether the bail out bill was a good thing was a bad thing they don’t know whether we just went off the cliff I mean when I am afraid that when people hear that you’re in a car  Versus JP Morgan Chase they’re gonna say it with this guy wants availability because he’s banker I think anybody that goes to the market or not is probably highway from Dedi going on and you know I really don’t know how to answer that I mean other than you economist is big news that happens like this is the dirt can you start talking about things like LIBOR which is the acronym for describes thank winding one bank give me another big money  Look at how much money that is we talking about hundreds of millions of dollars going back-and-forth in the blink of an eye and most the time it’s like your post you don’t really think about it a whole lot he has this other guy on Reggy Quadros runs his own  Economy shop, but are you cute economics Conrad tell us are you feeling fairly high-level Sharon both about the status, but I’m trying that you got there is I am oh dear personally that’s my feeling personally, I think that the economy is quite concerning now I will show a decline  Appointment the appointment cute relatively high reading. The GDP is the reason for your help. Personally, I think that really does that we already are let’s kind of figure out how scared people should be. Should they be talking about like I should buy some rice and some purified water, and eat ostrich think I’m at money will not have any purpose or meet me in the future. I wouldn’t go that far away night. I do think that I’m not gonna say that I believe that the initial proposal that –  Program document was there but I don’t believe that the department or the federal reserve allowed to get bad enough low on but I do think that we’re in for an apartment leave a mark is that going to go higher a lot of reasons OK let’s be defensive about our investment I get it we talk to Suresh and Grayson got him on the phone at Columbia business school Alex, we have been hearing him you know for a week now basically like this disaster is not  Bill the ballot bill did not pass. How are you feeling boring market in Labu RSI Labu Boni is it bad to know Liston and a curse me right here I’m gonna stab you with me right here we might have identified the problem is that I just said, how are you feeling about this disaster  Shock you know the plan was rejected added on Eno oversight by Congress not giving all the 700000,000,000 at one curb and executive pay and we had to knowledgeable who are the baby to Hadley are you freaked out at all when you know I could be wrong digested information  Goes back but I kind of knew kind of genuinely but but a lot of people still with my money. Yeah eventually the only way that they have to let it. That’s the only way they make money. Let’s look at some of the land bank you know all the problem call me Pak  Dark option to buy another 5 million that’s like a credit card money I’m happy to lend penalty read and Dito paper and judging from what I’m seeing that there are a lot of people who just wanna know what tomorrow’s gonna bring so you come and find out I did your.org/money  Money podcast for Monday, September 28 on Laura Conaway you take care 

----
