---
title: 081020) Was the Money Ever There
date: 20081020
tags: #PlanetMoney
citation: "“Planet Money,” _NPR_, 2 Juni 2023. [https://www.npr.org/podcasts/510289/planet-money](https://www.npr.org/podcasts/510289/planet-money) (diakses 4 Juni 2023)."
---

A listener asks where the money went, and whether it was ever there in the first place. An economist explains. It has to do with deleveraging. With an additional stop in Seattle, for a postal worker's view of the economic crisis.

----

Support for this NPR podcast in the following message come from better help online counseling by licensed professional counselors, specializing in issues including depression, stress and anxiety is it betterhelp.com/money to learn more and get 10% off your first month how many Americans have reservations, especially about allowing the government to hold shares in private mass Market, I would oppose such measures under ordinary circumstances but these are no ordinary circumstances. Hi and welcome to NPR is planet money I’m Adam Davidson and I’m Laura Conaway today’s Monday, October 20. It’s about 4:01 PM here in New York City Adam you got a first-hand look at the credit markets today what’s the deal? Well, if I don’t want to come out and say it’s all good news, but it is better news the planet money indicator , we talk about here is the Ted spread which is a rough approximation for global anxiety for the amount of money moving through the banking system felt dramatically today. You actually noticed this before I did it fell below for 2.960 more than 18% drop that is a huge drop and 296.96. Do you know in normal times before this whole crisis even wanna see that down in the 0.5% area so it’s still way way way in the stratosphere but it’s nowhere near as far in the stratosphere as it has been up well above four. Yeah someone was saying that Bloomberg which has a Ted spread indicator had actually had to add a five to its graph  of over for for so long and creeped up towards five. It looks like it almost kissed five and basically that’s a measure of how much risk banks are willing to take on how much they’re willing to learn to each other, but I actually was on the front lines of credit crisis, our friends, a tradition, angel securities a will and Tom and we talk to sell often I went down there this morning with Robert Siegel the host of all things considered. Actually, I think, right as we’re talking all things considered he’s in New York it’s just on the other side of his wall here  Just going on the air now and we went to our favorite money traders to see what was going on at a time corona this compared to a typical day last year. Oh very very quiet. The normal flows on the day for us. In the markets. A slow day. We would get a transact 3 to 4,000,000,006 one month out to one year maturity today for example, with transact Nicolas 300 million that’s extremely busy compared to the way it’s been the last four weeks you will Ashton reset about 10 days ago you described being at work here as watching paint dry a little bit more active than that right now yeah it is but it’s it’s almost as if the investigation  of what we’re seeing is the result of or the anticipation of the capital infusion to certain banks, and they intern going out and putting it to work in the term market the people were not saying are the people who continually have a turnover of money in the money market funds we get to see that return to the  Market. The big problem is if your money manager and you’re looking at is yields is yields or just totally out of sight the salivating they wish they could invest he was like like one while you have the app fed funds rate of a one to one and a half percent on any given day even below one percent, but that you can go out to know if you were allowed to invest in a three month at 4% for six months it over 4% they would love those return the problem with the money for the snow is that while they can buy at the fear is that  They can’t turn around and sell it if another crisis hits the idea is it now people don’t want to buy because they’re afraid they can’t sell yet so there’s a few issues going on what is there’s Laura bank and Adam bank needs money I need $1 billion to get me through the next three months I want to borrow money you have an extra billion dollars  so in normal time bhagas basically a call Tom or will affect hey I need to borrow billion you call them and say have an extra billion they take a warm meet Adam let him $1 billion so what I’m buying some music commercial paper commercial with big industrial size I am what has stop happening is that you’re willing to let people still need to borrow a bank  Borrow with Laura bank than anything 1 is there afraid that Adam banks gonna go out of business you know that we’re seeing so many major banks by the business they’re afraid that if you let me $1 billion, but then the other thing is even if you’re 100%, convinced to 99% of its I won’t go out of Trust  You still might need to sell that commercial paper. You might need to basically get your loan repaid hurry financial system and you might need to have that money available scared that no one else will buy it so even if the bank is sound afraid of the investment itself with his money, if that makes sense, and so that the lack of trust, and the lack of the lack of ability to to move in and out of this loan, which has been absolutely  40 years 35 years as long as this industry has completely frozen up in the last month on Friday was having barest hint of movement they were saying we are very far so question today Adam from the listener and I think it started when I blocked about one of my favorite subjects which is imaginary money someone on the blog had asked what happens to the money in a write down. If your bank says it’s not worth 20 billion instead of 30 billion where did the other team billion go right and this is a question I get a lot where did the money go and it’s such a confusing think of the simple answer is there is less money in the world dinner used to be by the way David Kestenbaum around if You’re , listening. Remember you owe us a story or counting on that so what I said on the blog with think for me anyway of which missing as value that money is to value is Riz art and I was trying to say, but if you think of which was gone Lauster gone missing is value instead of money, isn’t dollars maybe that will help, but it immediately went to this question how many Mosher of Lincoln Nebraska if the idea is that we are losing value enough physical money did we ever really have the money to live in the first place, and is that what is meant by the leveraging the market, trying to find a true value from inflated one Kelly Mosher  Raska, I have an economist for you. He’s one of our favorite credit risk analysts the ass, and he can tell you all about the leveraging and all about what it means when there’s less money in the world that says the best way to figure out this word deal everything is just take that deal  Leveraging but it’s really about borrowing money you can go buy off the company $100 in dollars little greedy dollar you wanna make more money so what we do $100 we put in dollars of our own money and we borrow $90 for that mean $10 we still have to pay back the $90 to be paid back  Now become $20 has gone from 10% to 100% and that is the magic of leverage. The world has gotten completely addicted like a narcotic overtime. What we’ve all done eating demon leverage to get Rika? that we actually want it I don’t want to use if I can just as quickly so you start the first day you do it you got a wait I just went from 10% to 100%. This is unbelievable a month later you’re thinking of 100%. I always get 100% I want to thousand percent  Absolutely exactly correct give me some idea of what’s the leverage level wind when I started I was going to see people with the 1990s average like shit for every dollar tree dollars and dime bag with people like we seem to be borrowing 20 to 30 time for every one dollar and $20-$30 a day  Borrowed money absolutely not. I took my borrowed money look like always borrowed money and my hundred if you’re going to tell us that this is a wonderful thing when things are going up but just like it, amplifies the ups, swing it it does the same going down absolutely on the other side you had to share which was $100 and you borrowed $90 and put , your own money and the share price goes up $10 you make 100% but the problem is if the share price for $10 then you add all your money at one extremely $20 $10 but you know oh far is the money from an extra $10  And by $20 my 190 is not changing it and that is the problem at the world events at the moment we have a huge amount today. The problem is what we bought with it ranging from houses every type of financial asset what happened to the amount falling in value which means we have a major problem that is, he never came  Mean out of date or reduce leverage and of course the real problem God borrow money out of houses, and now they falling salary before and that’s why we think stock market for that’s why we study and we see banks, no longer lending money to other banks, banks, not lending money to us to companies  Banks are very interesting example of why at the end of the day are the Balkan people who lent money always going to be at the epicenter of this problem addiction they create Clairbridge very highly beverage only really have one dollar to share capital every $10 they make Edmond Bang like the musclemen kitten departed Lehman brothers  And daddy to like that officially started to leverage by 20 to 30 times about the musing little anecdote tree in about 2000 and they should be allowed to leverage more leverage have a lot of leverage. They borrowed the money that they left so I had to change into reverse  For money and what happens when they wipe out the shit or money which is at the epicenter of stock lending money to other people, so let me see if I try to picture these things and try and make make a very simple model success so I I have a dollar I call you up and say hey will you let me nine bucks I want to win $10 to Laura cause she’s got this business plan  And for you you give me nine bucks I gave Laura 10 bucks she takes that $10 and she does whatever it is she starts her you know tambourine of musical yeah you thought about that in the first few weeks she’s making money she’s paying back the loan I’m able to pay you back everyone’s happy but then all of a sudden  it turns out shockingly she’s not a very good tambourine us and no one is paying her money. Sorry an artist has her price yes and so she can’t pay me back. I can’t pay you back and it turns out you owe someone else the money and on and on and on that that’s sort of the model were thinking of absolutely and the super really really bad element in there I only wish Wheatland, Laura tambourine , the problem is we didn’t actually Linda real business at what we did was going on Bang Avenue. It’s like houses and shit going up and up in value income from the person borrowing behalf a picture we had was effectively if it doesn’t really matter whether you borrow to pay the interest and pay back delay so deleveraging is the process of pulling back from being leveraged correct is about getting rid of the debt and what we think now is a simple process  About it’s all very common sense. If you have too much debt is individual, what are you do if you have something tambourine or your whatever you feel it, take the money and pay off debt. Alternatively, you stop spending money you don’t have a Starbucks cappuccino you basically drink water from the tap reduce your consumption like you might’ve thought you would get a franchise your tambourine concept I basically actually happening now paid off spending at the shops or wherever they spend on companies investment and that’s why the whole calling meet Kelly Mosher I hope that! Suture cheat death helps. You were looking forward to breakfast with gas on Saturday Heyward, you got that paper, you were telling me about yeah, I didn’t actually caught up with her to be talking about Hannah Jaffe walk freelances for planet money out of Kpop you in Seattle she’s our favorite were very positive mood today. You know Denver Niki, the Fed German says that he supports an economic stimulus mood today. Definitely I’m waiting for the check how to draw if you want recently did a segment about her own mail carrier a woman name Andrea  and then he will make up a whole story about you. They are and I love you particularly I’m interested in people and 13 notices you know times that happened credit is Carter come by so when people started no bugging out the Creque about Andrea now he’s a no on the street because he really is actually having a unique perspective on what people money story of our friends to their mail. Was it hard to get her to talk to you , it wasn’t he actually I mean he wants around by your self every day the things that she notices on the information that she has the people that really you know aren’t aware of it but now carriers have a balcony delivered to call Jeffy Walt thank you let’s roll some tape OK before we can do this I need to clear up one question yes your mailman  how do I ask? At least if your mailman is Andrea Salinas in the mail I know where the family lives in Dokter I know who’s retired. He’s interested in the opera member of the NRA member of society who is Andrea knows Acong about what’s going on in that place politicians love to me and drop Main Street in America I asked her to please give me streets are bad  people is a mile south of here but I guess yes skimp on the salty mailman attitude. She owns the street on her route here in Seattle wide residential block with section 8 housing that’s up against lasis navigate Eki condos that cost half $1 million. see we starting to subsidize housing  infinity for black leather is getting another overcast late payment bills lots of bad news now has increased little box collection notices on parking tickets to overdue utility bills to towing. Lots of cars and people are coming to pick up your saw the Andrea mailman index. Where am I for insiders certified letters a major negative indicator set a problem  at five and certifies are almost always sad news now another measure color, normal utility bill on your monthly envelopes and yellow. We will eat it all go read Andrea three noticing a lot of weather downturn in the mailman index of economic indicators more names on each mailbox I’ve noticed a lot of people moving in with grandparents but I’m just assuming that’s what it is because it’s a young guy he’s getting like hot rod magazine of Sanni. He’s living with something you know this like 80 year old woman who is this on Social Security , on the other end of the block Andrew heads over to a couple businesses and shovel a little out of your shop inches in my credit is today and he’s like well that’s good you give me a so I can give you these bills needs credit card offers Lord I’m guessing that that’s not really sustainable situation and that was a while ago. These days is Andrea watches the bad news nail gather into heavy stack the other  kind credit card offers started to go away. I still see credit cards sending out stuff but it has really really going down there used to be a lot. This is the way the Andrea mailman index registers that thing we can drink so much Welly the credit companies in less going to my money credit card issuer  but the credit card companies are coming to peoples homes to tell them that I’m for you no thank you Andrea Seattle doorstep and empty a free credit and full of red envelopes and certified for always joke with me. Please don’t give me anything and those jokes are usually funny, but sometimes people have a real desperation in there  baseball today the kids bread doesn’t care about the Andrea mailman go to Sita am I sees other things to people living there live to do their weird, irrational, shaky judgment the am I takes into account human what I see a lot of them feel people you know are in financial problems  getting company like QVC Fingerhut on credit and at the same time you’re bringing money for five mail your package from QVC starting on it $700 billion plan as it moves forward Wall Street analysts will be watching Wall Street will be watching wall speed. Andrea will be watching email on a Jackie walk. Thank you talking about the mailman indicator. Are you like wall-to-wall office? Consider right I’m not sure I got to talk to them they’re here in there  internally native New Yorker so I can stay town and he’s here to meet with lots and lots of five people in New York to see the prices firsthand. Where might you go besides the money market traders well I’m trying to arrange an interview with Tim Geitner, the head of the New York fed he will never be recorded for broadcast so we have to figure out what to do doing interview. Eminem have an actor , I don’t know Caitlin would you do would you play his part also, I just want to say some quickly credibly obvious. We are really making this up as we go along. I’m making it up as I go out and I feel really happy with the Pak at the person things that I want to do to to talk about we just haven’t had the time to do so what is the daily check in how the credit crisis is affecting real people and I hope you get a chance to do that yeah, we can actually got some comments in an email from people who are volunteering, so will be following up even more yeah  I’m very excited to do that this week. I’m trying to purchase the other thing I want to do is get a reading list for myself and I think a lot of people are like that just some basic things I want to understand better what is I really wanna understand what the government responses like? Oppression was what happen during that time looking into what are the new rules that are going to be written in over the next year or two I feel like I’m not as prepared as I’d like to do for that, but that is all to come in the future , do you want to listen? Yeah I was gonna say someone asked me today if there’s anything that I will shoot you guys at the review that you’re not doing in the one thing I wish you would do Eki first of all is take pictures of the economy you see around you Kaitlyn Kenny put up a picture actually on our Facebook group because a great place for you guys to post photos. It’s just right there  and Poswa she took a great picture of a guy panhandler with a sign campaign for that for the economic crisis, I took a picture this weekend I don’t have it up yet, but I hope to put it on the Facebook group soon of a bagel shop, saying that because of a drop in flower prices exactly going to drop the price of a big loss  no one Montague I guess yeah but I will wait to our Facebook group. Actually, I put it in every podcast post to do on the blog and if you guys would join the group and start sending pictures of the economy as you see it, I think we could have a lot of fun and dad. That’ll do it for planet money today. My other pledge my personal pledges to block more you look really good and I have not won a threat level. Maybe reaching orange yeah yeah you’re really  bad please join us at that block npr.org/money listening to right now I’m in Adam Davidson I’m Laura Conway. Thanks for listening. 


----
