---
title: 080922) A Bank Lobbyist's Bailout Wish List
date: 20080922
tags: #PlanetMoney
citation: "“Planet Money,” _NPR_, 2 Juni 2023. [https://www.npr.org/podcasts/510289/planet-money](https://www.npr.org/podcasts/510289/planet-money) (diakses 4 Juni 2023)."
---

With Congress determined to pass a $700 billion bailout bill for Wall Street this week, bank lobbyist Scott Talbott gives us his view of the action. He wants the economy back on his feet — but he wants no limit on pay for the boss.

----

Support for this NPR podcast in the following message come from better help online counseling by licensed professional counselor specializing in issues including depression, stress and anxiety is it betterhelp.com/money to learn more and get 10% off your first month and Wood Creek. No huddle: New Year’s Eve, all rolled into one and you were listening to the planet money podcast. I’m Adam Davidson. This is our continued crisis week coverage. This is the week too. I guess we could count on counting it is Monday, September 22 we give the time here it’s a little because if things change so fast it’s 1112 in the morning the Chris Dodd Bill literally just was released. We know that congressional Democrats and the White House are our fierce negotiations, and we thought it be very helpful to talk to Scott Talbot Scott is I guess you could call him the leading lobbyist for the financial industry he  at fair Scott OK he he runs lobbying for the financial services roundtable. They represent basically the hundredth largest companies that care about what’s happening this week banks by net, financial institutions of insurance companies and Scott you how does this week compare to any other week in your life oh, this is like no other  Amazing week. I am over the weekend I receive the 600 email conference call at all called the weekend rolling into this week. It will be more of a pain but I can hemorrhoids out of the day 30 tonight to know about the 1130 or 12 and I will get up tomorrow and do it all over again to talk to you this morning, if you are  And I should say we’re here with Laura Conaway top line what’s at stake for the financial industry this week what are they paying you to make sure does happen and what are they paying you to make sure it does not happen or bill and the health, inspector and economy, as well as the major players Pantech pairs as well, and the treasury, as long with the college, taking huge steps  Enormity of this at the fact that huge step up the housing market economy, individual everybody for main street, and all of your pets of evil trickle down 202 actors who support the White House poured the White House proposal with ministration proposal. We had pork and move quickly to the market need to help right now we support haven’t brought authority from Congress to the treasury Wikipedia , we had pork flexibility for the treasury department to utilize his programming to the $700 billion program purchase a capital a cash flow to regain operations as normal of mortgage credit card auto loan this program will help restart valley market and economy. Sure the average listener comments are coming out. I’m just gonna represent their side for just a second what day here when you talk about the treasury coming out in spending 700 billion or 1 trillion or whatever it’s gonna be Dubai up his bad ass that’s what they say is $700 billion to watch people who made a video of the billion dollars already off my back I know you’ve heard them who caused the greatest  Faulty risk management yeah how do you deal with that couple of issues here if you look at the prime lending market, which is really the root of all of this one, there is a requirement of plantains to Sinta other aggressively Len to neighborhoods in our region short of a you know when we were at dinner with required to do it to the same time there’s a guy large three a culpability in the industry, ranging from Pram real estate brokers to mortgage broker to play to those including remembers that you can play my heart  They verify they’re saying we bears responsibility started with that the requirement that we lend lend to neighborhood neighborhood and then there was some degree of culpability from the mortgage broker to the bank to the investor all along. I know one topic that pay the emperor has no clothes. I’m not a big believer in crime, movers and single events except things into motion. I’m particularly I just got to say just put my cards on the table and particularly unpersuaded by the argument that this is a  Roll a result of the government seeing you got a lead to port, there was tremendously lax, lending stamp complete collapse of of true of prudent, lending practices in and risk with simply priced far to check what happens this week that pushes your membership too. I don’t know if the word is punished but to accept the consequences of their bad decision in normal times I think anyone who believes in capitalism and I’m certainly Samator  Believe in capitalism would welcome the idea that major institutions disappear when they take risks the size and scope that they pay off that’s a good thing I think most of your members agree with that idea rent, sure sure enough of politics and policy in general the market we believe the market partner should work their magic  Dad believe it I know it’s hard to think of anywhere else with the market support. They’re magically number Theo‘s have been terminated unusual area where the concept of too big to fail entire country is in trouble, and we are beginning to see where the government is you know why  is AIG we cannot allow AIG to fail. G insurers the shipping world the barbershop for the bakeries and if Edi insurance is gone that all of those that have not operate and the catastrophic affect on the Honnami in general justify the traffic this seems like a great week for your membership. I don’t see how they end up as a result of this action, paying the price for the rest of the tour. I did the great looking at the dock a couple pink one they’re already have lockers, and  Share value with her company but the shareholders as well public is looking for typically they are talking about the government taking ownership, priority, or equity addition in the company but now you have the government has an owner of your company. Secondly, there is a provision here to limit exactly to come for the company the company program wicket all the way right up to the top , I’m not into that but I think I feel the anger I feel the frustration that I listeners. Let us know the family members. Let me know about those guys are walking off Scott free and you’re saying no that’s got free they’ve lost major you know that stock option, but they’re not. They are not bearing the full weight, the full consequences of their decisions, and it may be what you’re saying is it’s just there is no way you can’t save the system without preventing the people from Stealing  Fat yeah and I think they’re far as this mantle. You are working hard to get rid of that essentially is the government what we’re talking about is is it Senator Todd I know that Barney Frank in the house wants to see that any institution that gets part of this government bail out their executives can only make a certain amount of money parachute with  Dollars when a company read that is that a yes acquire Plymouth Rock habitation Nungki want that out yeah Scott, thank you so much. That was Scott Howard, the chief lobbyist for the financial services roundtable Scott, you and I feel like we had a frank exchange that I appreciate your ring that I hope we can talk with you  This week and over the next year sure I’m Adam Davidson for national public radio is playing I forget to go to npr.org/money we have a lot of great information wima fabulous reporter Dan as hell in the other room, analyzing, assessing everything that has been happening and posting it on our block a series of really interesting podcast discussions today /money and also send your questions send your comments and things you want to know things you want us to be asking people to planet money at npr.org 

----
