---
title: 080930) A Question of Trust
date: 20080930
tags: #PlanetMoney
citation: "“Planet Money,” _NPR_, 2 Juni 2023. [https://www.npr.org/podcasts/510289/planet-money](https://www.npr.org/podcasts/510289/planet-money) (diakses 4 Juni 2023)."
---

As Congress continues to talk about a possible rescue of Wall Street, the stock market bounces back a little. One voter tells us everyone is looking out for themselves, while two economists look for a bailout the public would be willing to buy.

----

https://www.npr.org/sections/money/2008/09/hear_the_need_to_believe.html

Support for this NPR podcast in the following message come from better help online counseling by licensed professional counselor specializing in issues including depression, stress and anxiety is it betterhelp.com/money to learn more and get 10% off your first month planet money podcast it’s about 547 here in New York I’m Laura Conaway the news today is a little more mix and yesterday stock market for me roller coaster 778 today. Some kind of rescue plan stock market rows like that to me or is it don’t know what’s gonna happen I don’t know whether the doomsday crowd white saying they don’t know whether or wether , they just don’t know we know what the field and the ideas are coming from people that is there anyone you do trust right now I don’t know really horrible way to feel. I feel like dumb Fatify people who thought you know what I look out at the little wind speed, right the second , what I see is a world in which you say I heard things about because right now people are never do you trust federal reserve chairman President Bush that was Terry Weiss mom to work I turn to John Macy law school is also an economist had them on the show before when I found a Maisie today  I need to do something but it needs a better pitch to the public. They switch back to Franklin Delano Roosevelt in the great depression. For example, on the following page number one Lake day play free in Wall Street or have a paper wallpaper for me if you don’t get it, I don’t get it  That hard and the house we’re having a moment right now in United States and I don’t think that the people who work in that blue outfield have any idea what’s about the do you yourself believe it needs to be some kind of government intervention here yes how would you then go about selling that government intervention to the American people where I think that I would  do you the bottom bar private part down to do the mortgage holder very strange mortgages and your variable rate mortgages of a kind of Internet variety you’re saying that you need a bill they would no longer be referred to as a Wall Street bill out but it would be referred to as a homeowner mail app  a master realize it intention proposition. Can we talk about what FDR did Truman? What year were talking here so right in the depression FDR comes in and says bank holiday but then proceeds to do what calm down go home in the marketplace price of Jenny sit down he starts having fire side chats and said OK people here’s what we’re gonna do that right it was the fireside chat was not a big part of selling it  on the web tire call Susan Boy capital market thanks to your professor John Macy. Hope the rest of your dentist visit went well. Finally I turned the first economist you ever said to me you’re a better ways to save Wall Street in this big bill out bill Ragu Rajon teaches at the University of Chicago. Regina may not have that much of that particular bill out bill but he does say the market needs to know help is coming. I think the market need to be reassured that something is beaten because right now we have a bank is , 807 whether to private money or to public money and it will come to that beach how long do we have? If something is on its way and of that there is some direct intervention with Bang you could have a little while and I am I I think that we are at a point where I am  Nervous and we need to convince comprehensive plan. Can you see if the IP cover shot and shot call completed and yard are we looking at a Mal in the time? Yeah a couple of weeks Ragu John also told me that the government hasn’t got to do everything at once. He thinks he can take maybe a series of small steps. Let you learn something along the way about what was really need it , that’s the planet money podcast for today Tuesday, September 30 is your questions your opinions your worries we are npr.org/money on Laura Conaway you take care 

----
