---
title: 080924) Congressman Takes a Gut Check
date: 20080923
tags: #PlanetMoney
citation: "“Planet Money,” _NPR_, 2 Juni 2023. [https://www.npr.org/podcasts/510289/planet-money](https://www.npr.org/podcasts/510289/planet-money) (diakses 4 Juni 2023)."
---

Rep. Brad Miller of North Carolina says he knows something needs to be done to save the economy. He's just not sure it's this bill, by Friday. Plus, an economist considers how much time is left to act.'

----

Hello and welcome to NPR planet money podcast. This is Laura Conaway today is Wednesday, September 24. It’s about 537 in the evening and as you probably heard Republican Senator John McCain GOP presidential nominee has announced if he is going to suspend his campaign he’s going back to Washington to try to work on the White House. His proposed $700 billion bail out bill for Wall Street Congress as it is going on with the Democratic side asking for a cap on executive pay the bankers and asking for protections for homeowners involved with that mortgages democrat Barack Obama continue with his campaign earlier today Alex Bloomberg, Adam Davidson shut down democratic representative Brandon Moore, North Carolina, and they asked him what it was like to be in Congress right now and dealing with Friday deadline essentially  There’s been a lot of talk about the dire consequences. If this ballot package is not is not passed and past quickly, do you do you know about this the specific scenarios these nightmares pacifically what will happen if this is not what is the worst case scenario Rob is potentially pretty standard said that if things went the way here they would go  And I and I have an apple an ad and know that we’re dealing with registration that has not been and we’re dealing with that little after the half of the thing. No problem here. Oh my God you’re too real pro build a problem but white, all that I do believe room for darker , there’s a visceral reaction down to the solution because it is all they don’t look like the rest of the neck at all. They have many houses and cars billion dollar salaries and they got us into this mess by the hidden city here by making bad bones, bad decisions, and now the only way  Only way to get out of $700 billion to give them almost $1 trillion a month to get us out and I’m not saying that that’s not. Did you share that this role like that just doesn’t seem fair on solution you know old do I ever yes and Nl and they seem to be completely full of how they are clean by a fairy  be they are making the man album bailout package they are grounding. It’s entirely their own fault their ground and they’re making the man out what kind of broken and I don’t think they have any at all how Americans react you’re saying this is a massive crisis and you and you do believe this is the worst. Sounds like you believe this is the worst financial price  as maybe potentially ever October 29 yeah of 1929 is but you don’t want to take this action is that I don’t want I don’t wanna come out of this rescuing I don’t want to come back and find Bobier in your other half the problem I will do  For him and what happened here fundamentally is this in a Jordan play in his sleep, define mortgages that woman home, Michael a borrowing, and would gladly leave the house by appreciate it all. Do you think that was a deliberate choice at your Morley that it was a delivered agreement that something must be done and that this is us , you know maybe doing nothing is the best in a bunch of bad options here I’m not there is a lot of outrage on the Democrat party. I’ll if you’re helping Billy or are you in Dyersburg not living at Valley necessary for us but far trying to make a fillet five cheating  Home on the Republican side there is an outrage at $700 billion and getting more involved. Yes theory Republican theory summary: please to talk about your own like I mean who’s there are you personally do you feel dyslexic heart mind divided by Khalid I guess we have to do this, but I don’t wanna do this and talk about the only your own internal emotional , trying to figure out what I’m gonna do and I know when I’m gonna do it until the final vote push push Chris much off and then when I come home after my part of the team, but how about them more than I do believe and again that was Congressman, Brad Miller  Money people how to use it. I also caught up with an economist. Roger Roger, who works out of the University of Chicago is the former chief economist of the international monetary fund and last week Dr. John Haekal leave it at this building seven dollar bill out bill look to him like a bit of election year politics. Basically it is sort of thrown together with Republicans trying to look like they were charged Democrats trying to look like they were in charge and that there might be other options. John said he still thinks there’s time at the time we spoke last week. The two sides are saying we’re gonna work this out. Yes we are and we’re gonna do it by Friday, right  And it’s getting pretty close to Friday. I think that the immediate urgency or action has had certified Finna be taken off at eight in part by the action already taken including I think guaranteed the money market funds the beef bacon from last week with that guarantee. Run in order to win. The government stepped in and said we’re gonna extend insurance to money market funds, the same way we do the savings exactly, and the other things that that had happened it banks that work  Text enter and Morgan Stanley have transformed the commercial banks and they both solidifies day been linked to the government and that has Spotify to be immediate need has a head. Not sure we’re out of the woods yet at the Costco in Quebec boring is still unusually high, which is just the bank , which is one of the one of the rationale behind this plan let’s try and remove the toxic waste from backbone across each other again I would say that we have some time but let’s not think this problem is going to wait had so this idea running out of time we’re running out of time. What happens if we do nothing in the next week from now still no plans come forward to Marshall  Need to be done in in short order in order to make a big markets work again bank of worried about each other’s banshee Diah I’m willing to lend that is a real problem and will affect economic activity overtime so with that needs to be that needs to be fixed or wife  And my Creedmoor bank failures and we might be a pro where the fact that you’re working on a plan and we’ll come up with something in short order maybe a month not indefinite can be enough rear shock the monkey Rachel thing well we are working on the details of the week application. I don’t have it done yet, but the Back  Deck would be good news also so you don’t necessarily see the apocalypse if I I would doubt that they will be at the end of the work. I do think however, that would be good for Congress to say we’re at work on something and we hope to do it very soon and end  Evidence of progress and that was Dr. Roger John at the University of Chicago and economist and this has been NPR‘s planet money podcast. You can check us out npr.org/moneyyoucanfollowustwitter.com planet money and you can email us at planet money, NPR ticket 

----
