---
title: 080922) Unprecedented Power Shift in Bailout, Prof Warns
date: 20080922
tags: #PlanetMoney
citation: "“Planet Money,” _NPR_, 2 Juni 2023. [https://www.npr.org/podcasts/510289/planet-money](https://www.npr.org/podcasts/510289/planet-money) (diakses 4 Juni 2023)."
---

The Bush Administration is asking Congress to buy up bad assets on Wall Street — and hand over a lot of power. Yale Law professor Jon Macey says he has never seen anything like this.

----

Support for this NPR podcast in the following message come from better online counseling by licensed professional counselor specializing in issues, including depression anxiety is it betterhelp.com/money to learn more and get 10% off your first month. Hi Adam David Silva national public radio money podcast it is September 22 this Monday at 11:36 AM. We’re having to say exactly when we are talking this week because things are moving so quickly that now Mike’s mini oven changed by the time podcast right now the looking at the legislative proposal from the treasury department to congress just a few minutes ago. Senator Chris died his Democratic response a separate bill. We thought it would be fabulous to hear from John Macy, who is definitely in Avila school and more to the point  reading specialist in business law banking law, the interaction between the government and the banking and financial system. Call Janet. It sounds like an interesting week for someone with all of those specialties. The most interesting I’ve ever had. In fact, I would say oh by the way, I should mention work on the way. Of course this morning is here  has been entire life studying banking and securities law and my hunch is your sort of everything you do is looking at decisions made in the 1930s that have impacted your entire lifetime. Sure there have been the changes since then but relieved quart room feet of American commerce the cord live with that then and you weren’t around then and you might’ve felt well. I’ll never be around for. That historic no long is that , that’s exactly right this is this is important is the events of the 1930s and in Nl any any remorse I felt nothing around then can we drop in on one particular part of this which is the power shift but I look at the early going of this is Phil it feels to me like there’s an awful lot of power that Congress is heading over to the treasury secretary, and I’d like to read  if that’s OK to proposal for treasury authority to purchase troubled SS draft nine 2108 this came out yesterday, Sunday evening and they’re coming at the trouble asset relief act Tara section 2 paragraph be necessary actions the secretary of treasury secretary is author to is authorized to take such actions as a second secretary, deems necessary to carry out the authorities in this act without limitation  really strong language without limitation very strong language that the one thing that we learned from this document is that something new about the balance of power opportunity for Congress they rarely have the opportunity to policy making it to 54 constitutional context is is, this is this bill constitutional and Congress give this much power to the executive shouldn’t there be checks and balances will fit the the  watching the checks and balances that is the response by people like Nancy Pelosi‘s power that’s their constitutional prerogative, but if they if they give it up we’re talking about the treasury secretary buying some ass is it really that big of power shift is basically been given a credit card however, you want but you can’t warranty can’t patriot I can’t listen in on our phone calls a minute is it really that big of power shit it is because he basically is given the power to shape the Economy  is able to decide which financial institutions get to survive and we don’t get to survive and there’s no there’s no a limitation with respect to figure me out the price or to the kind of financial institutions that are included sample. We’re following this believe that this is about financial institutions, the way that the 1930s regulations  expect broader than that for example did leave the automobile company at the plenary authority to determine the winners and losers in the economy. Can you give us a another example history of this kind of power shift? No, the even the even the declaration of war still brought with it , if not for anything else because Congress retain the ability to authorize spending isolation, if you look at section 10, the mat maximum amount of this is this includes the authority to spin the the other section. It really caught. My eye was in a lot of other people that I was section 12 I’m gonna read that decisions by the secretary, treasury secretary, pursuant to the authority of this act are non-reviewable and committed to agency discretion. Meaning, of course , and no injunction or other form of equitable relief may be issued by any court of law or any administrative agency is is that unusual or is that kind of standard bureaucratic language? It’s very unusual it’s it is it is constitution gives Congress the power to find him a of the of the federal courts, so the  section is limited or non-reviewable of a glimmer Persian into this. Do you know of any other build it that says this someone in the government can never be reviewed in anyway not an economic may be some legislation national security, but nothing related to the economy I want to read an email you sent me earlier today OK this email was I don’t think that there is ever been such a powershift evening time of war and that’s because you think of in war there is oversight. This is truly unprecedented I don’t think any other administration would’ve had the Hotspur to do this even Nixon Roosevelt would find it amusing, but he wouldn’t have dreamed of going this far. Push pause it, obviously want Congress way way out of the loop for some reason , I was gonna ask if you agree with that but you wrote wrote it and I stand by it yes I do Adam because imagine you’re going through a partner you’ve been working with the last 200 years well I want to remove you from the fire but you don’t have any more power  to the power of the purse it’s it’s incredible to think that that essentially executive branch can walk Congress into me what it is into we’re going to get a whole new economic landscape and I think a whole new political landscape as well. Laura because that is when you have a real crisis, a way to deal with the way unilateral  that’s what really so remarkable about this. It says you Congress you’re only gonna be sending the gears of our efforts to fix this problem so you got to get out of our way are you or your part of the problem and as far as I can tell her we wanna push back a little bit but we certainly understand we can’t get in the way of this. Thank you so much John BC of Yale law school thank you Laura planet money I’m Adam David, Timur NPR, planet money race this week three coverage continues at npr.org/

----
