---
title: 080917) Naked Short Selling, Meet Moral Hazard
date: 20080917
tags: #PlanetMoney
citation: "“Planet Money,” _NPR_, 2 Juni 2023. [https://www.npr.org/podcasts/510289/planet-money](https://www.npr.org/podcasts/510289/planet-money) (diakses 4 Juni 2023)."
---

Alex Blumberg takes a peek at the arcane Wall Street practice of naked short selling, while Adam Davidson considers what happens when the Street takes a break from moral hazard.

----

Support for this NPR podcast in the following message come from better help online counseling by licensed professional counselors, specializing in issues, including depression, stress, and anxiety visit betterhelp.com/money to learn more and get 10% off your first month. Hi this is Laura Conaway with planet money today’s Wednesday, September 17 off a lot in use that’s been happening let’s see Lehman brothers is not gonna be saved. AIG is going to be saved the two $85 billion in loans. We’re gonna take a step back from all of that gonna take a step way back we’re gonna look at something called naked, short selling, which is a piece of lumber did on a very arcane odd and maybe sensible, maybe nonsensical part of the financial system he did it for this American life is a contributing editor with us and we think he’s just right, the chairman of the SEC securities and exchange commission is often referred to as Wall Street to top cop and this past year here in which the global financial system seems perpetually on the verge of collapse, collapse, due in large part complex unprecedented, as we know now extremely risky financial products created and sold on Wall Street made expect to be hearing a lot for sir  Christopher Cox, countryman assembly absent from any public house now instead, it’s been two other government officials have done the heavy, lifting the chairman of the fed and Bernanke of course the secretary of treasury report with all of her television is Patrick talking about the most recent prices. Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac is three men have a regular and frequent appearances before Farid’s house and senate, banking and finance please three horsemen of the financial apocalypse, Apocalypse, Christopher Cox. More third wheel. When is the June 23 article on the front page of the Wall Street Journal titled SEC chief under fire is 36 bigger Wall Street roll. Jericho starts off by describing at 5 AM conference call at your place in March between the country‘s top financial regulators topic up the phone call what to do about the Nl Tessa back Bear Stearns, which is about to collapse up a financial meltdown. The article describes events after the phone call this way “when they were done the treasury secretary, informed the president head of the federal reserve bank of New York call Bear Stearns, Christopher Cox, chairman of the securities and exchange commission didn’t call anyone else. Sisi was there, Stearns regulator he didn’t take part in the media and an interview. Mr. Cox said the time of the call changed overnight and no one told him you had a  Full goes on to describe how the next night text Mr. negotiations, if a wood to do with the restaurant because he was at a birthday party and have a day after that I missed another conference going out in the sale of their stores following weekend he left on a family vacation, so this was the backdrop in July when the various crises gripping Wall Street nations, financial system certainly took yet another term for the worse and Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac into the stage for the first time ferryman Freddie Mac, despite having names that a child make it to Upie are well we’re two of the most important financial institutions of the American economy. They are involved in roughly 70% of the market  Day they collapse the housing market would come to an effective standstill, which is why I rather let that happen. The government took them over last weekend, but back in July when the failure of Fannie and Freddie, I just started to see Mika possibility the stock price of taking 60% of its value just one week is it the government is trying to figure out what to do. Thank you very much Mr. Sherman Senator Shelby members the committee for this opportunity describe the SEC‘s actions to deal with the recent developments in our financial market  And tax testifying before the Senate committee of banking, housing and urban affairs at this meeting he’s announcing his very first emergency action of this entire economic crisis. Effect is the only emergency action he’s taken. It is first in Boulder step onto the national stage as a new faucet on this day is announcing an order, and that stopping particular Wall Street practice, practice provocative me today the commission will issue an order designed with hands, protections against naked, short, selling in the securities of anime and Freddie Mac , you probably don’t know if I can try telling us I certainly don’t understand it. You have to understand. It’s upstanding cousin regular shorts on that razor perfectly legal an incredibly common way of making money. If you think of stock price is about to go down in value is artworks play I think I’ll be at Mas Adit for a fall. I find someone who owns a whole bunch of IBM stock and I see that person can I borrow 1000 shares person says fine and Lynn’s me the shares which I need to sell on the market later maybe a couple of hours or days or weeks I got back on the market but that’s 1000 shares of IBM and return them to my lender , if I’m right and the stock is gone down then I’ve made money sold for say $10 a share the fuck back at five dollars a share a pay bill under a small fee and I get the difference forward happens millions of times a day it gets confusing thing so I can do when you get to the naked part everyone I talk to initially about the story explain it to me this way naked shorts on your side is the same as regular short time it’s up that you don’t actually part of the stock first but that doesn’t make any sense. How can I sell something that I haven’t borrow? My name is Jim Kaufman I’m retired from the screws insurance commissioner used to run investigation  And I was working at 2627 years. This is the thing that I think it’s hard to understand is when when you when you short so you borrow the stock from somebody you sell it at the current price you wait for the price to go down you buy it back in then you get the stock back to the pirate from when you naked  Short sell you haven’t borrowed the stock yet petro what do you sell it you’re selling stock but you don’t have a side it doesn’t matter been a different in many respects but you hung up. You get the money in your pocket and you don’t deliver the car right in some circumstances that would be considered that is showing your item you don’t ever considered  Activity that’s not your stock and why is that not true the stock market to the paraphrase of presidential candidate that’s not my integrity. It turns out that naked shortselling is one of those crazy Quan is the financial system that when you come up on it for the first time I can’t believe it actually works. That way all things started back in stock for actual paper slips that stock boys ran back-and-forth across Wall Street wheelbarrows knows that is if I called my broker and I said I wanted to short a stock my broker with for himself a scotch and say I see you then have you part it yet and I’d say no not yet, but when I do, I’ll have my boy run it over in a wheelbarrow, and then my broker With , I will find an old chap I’ll go ahead and sell it despite the fact that everything is done on computer today that old system is still my license plate mean it still possible call my broker in Heaven And Hell shares that I don’t own and having Pak and have the money still show up in my account and liver bought the phantom shares I sold has those shares credited to their account then something called the clearing settlement system get stuck with a headache if I have enough  if the shares that I sold continue not to show up for three days settlement and cleaning system declares was called, failed to deliver. The buyer still owns the stock that I really exhausted and I still keep the money from the sale of the stuff they never really existed. The only one who’s orang is my broker, the clearing agent contact the sellers broker and says you have a sale here and tells them that they need to settle that up and ask Num for days  The broker may or may not do that if the broker doesn’t do that continue to get nasty calls and nasty letter, but but that’s about the size of it and some brokers, depending on the nature of the broker and depending on the importance of the customer who sold short  to that broker, may or may not bothering the paint Harrison, and deliver about, here’s the thing, though most fails, the vast majority eventually Duclair loans that don’t or just a tiny fraction of the total market, wherever 1 billion shares can trade every day the 20+ years the gym Coffman worked at the SEC. He did investigate and even bring enforcement actions against naked  Short-sellers it was for the most part it says a fringe activity I took place in the market murkier corners to Jim Coffman naked shortselling, but it’s up to bring a multi billion dollar company Freddie Mac it doesn’t make sense. What is there making sure sely buys everything I have about that they’re probably wise, but was far far far from being the primary cause for your client , it was mystifying to Jim Coffman, and all sorts of people who follow the SEC that several days after testify in Capitol Hill, German Cox net good on the promise to go I can make it short selling, came out with his promised emergency order preventing emergency order was unusual, because instead of Barenaked, shortly across the board cuts out loud to practice only when it came to the stock of 19 specific company  is Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac 17 banks in brokerages like Merrill Lynch, Goldman Sachs, Morgan Stanley, a bunch of other big name to master and was only a temporary ban in Lynn Turner was 25 years. He’s retired now because he was when he heard about the order for the first time I will call Kos. I was actually over in Utah fly fishing with a bunch of other people hood, and if the SEC and I think we’re all summer maze by the whole whole situation, but certainly was talked a lot around the dinner table  Seem to be strange that the SEC would be taking this particular path to trying to deal with the supreme crisis when obviously there were other bigger issues out there at the SEC was just dealing with what seem to be almost sideshow of a naked sure sely first of all salesman make it for tonight was already basically illegal regulation passed in 2004 by the SEC require brokers have a commitment to borrow chairs before they sold on the market  is in the SEC had the power to investigate. I’ll just failed to deliver. They can track down the people who didn’t have existing lot if you really wanted to further titan regulations are much better way to go about it you can simply Dr. rule hear that said on the date you sell these shirts short but you’ve got to deliver the sheriffs just like when you buy shares someone has to deliver to you on that day when you go on and it it it is a very simple  I common sense fixing and I see no reason with you. I see that the SEC couldn’t do it I think it’s a lot better than all the sun trying to come out with exemptive orders that apply to just 19 companies, and this was the strangest thing of all that the presumably dead forever why protect us 19 company while leaving the rest of the corporate world supposed to be delivered danger. Yes, he wouldn’t talk to me for the story direct me to an app add that German Kotsenburg, trying to explain his actions to confused and skeptical public “the emergency order is not a response to unbridled make a short survey, which so far has not occurred whether it is intended as a preventative Step to help your store market confidence at a time without a sore they needed in other words, singled out 19 companies for protection already illegal practice. I hadn’t actually happened  to check market carpet. He doesn’t explain his winter. Just got a wonder whether you know what was the real motive here and and I think the real motive was not so much to protect the markets, not so much tact, average investor, but to protect particular companies, and when you’ve got the regulator, trying to protect particular companies, and deciding who can or cannot trade that’s no longer a free market  Away present Boy with the concert looking at this isn’t that just to help the free market means this is an extraordinary time and it calls for extraordinary measures is 19 companies are so central to the operation of the global financial system but it is a special treatment center to hide. Let them feel. We can’t press the market to insure that they want  For the promise that’s totally inconsistent. German toxic wanted to step in the power of government last couple of years after the Apple opportunity would’ve been much less intrusive, and they would’ve had the added benefit of fixing some of the problems that God is here in the first place example  is a basic principle of economics that the market works best with buyers and sellers have good information about what’s been bottles county companies to keep potentially damaging information off the balance sheet him from investors and the fact is I wasn’t accurate to contribute for Michigan marketplace because the SEC didn’t require them to disclose that information so instead of requiring a disclosure of information that would remove the uncertainty marketplace to make it by G-Eazy  Rice securities fairly definition band they can shortselling another issue. Owner is the credit rating agencies OK getting a little exclamation credit rating agencies is their name to just write bonds insecurities specifically for our story type of security called CDO, which is the thing that said, motion entire financial crisis, no Wall Street, created the CVS in one of the credit ready to give them my readings in the clear them safe for investors , the problem is a they went and did the rating agencies were paid by the same wall street from security. They were reading, clear conflict of interest so if a wall street from doesn’t like the rating, one agency get it, can you switch to another agency during the housing bubble, with lots and lots of the security need it there’s a ton of money, a huge incentive to get my reading reading inches are pulling in Decherd amounts of money in a hearing  I believe was the spring time Sherman Cox from the SEC was questioned about that by Senator Shelby from Alabama and Senator Jack Reed from Rolla Rhode Island, and they asked the Germans during the testimony, when he like to have legislation that would fix that and will give him the additional powers to be able to change those policies and procedures, or demand change the center inappropriate into that Sherman Cox responded no appointed you. If you don’t feel the statue, gives you the authority to examine the substance of  a great Rick ratings on the procedures in methodologies would you want that authority given the situation with Sinta the marketplace this juncture it’s my judgment that you in the Congress of struck a sound Val and I think it’s just basically astounded that the two senators, and I think most people if they were aware that would be a standard buy it as well. They were basically saying we were riding whatever legislation you need to go after this problem. Yes, that’s exactly right  You have to have an interest, but these agencies are consistently produce a credit rating integrity and how do you accomplish that unless you’re able to go in and look at the disciplines of their procedures and methodology it to you in a conversation struck the proper balance here because “at least in terms of discussion that’s on the table yes, another point during this hearing  Center to read asked German Cox whether he needs more money for enforcement again do you feel loved Airbender film out that you’re going to give it here the one resource see his market and it’s not dirty here with me but you believe you’re going to be I think overall really billion dollars with her converses provided us with the latest project that is ranking Republicans Richard Shelby is the recipient of the spirit of an appraiser work  Chamber of Commerce I’m in very easily described as a pro-business anti-regulation conservative with the current financial turmoil is Meadows old labels. A little unreliable has made things like senate, thinking, subcommittee Haris they are bears we can be here in the Stream spectacle of one pro-business Republican Shelby are you with another pro-business republican or cock, robin Meade, for stronger regulation enforcement of the market  Specially strange because the one arguing against this regulation is the chief regulator your Senator Shelby Ln., Demola home you and your leader ship will do the job right it is Ecy‘s not gonna do the job. Somebody else will have to be Christopher Cox like a lot of people in Kapuk Jesus as an ideological opposition to government regulation. The market in his view will correct itself credit rating agencies with bad ratings for example will eventually go out of business  as the market to get things right with any trust, the government use that you almost across the board. What’s up Bangtan brokerages I’m Wall Street you should’ve trusted resistance is the government intervention didn’t get back to the job. Urgency order expired, mid-August stock prices for most of the company she was trying to text actually lower the order. First Financial fact we all know what happened to Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac planet money. People have been all over the place this week filing like crazy. Adam Davidson went over to talk of the nation and had a good talk over there with the sky, Neil Conan host about moral hazard, roll moral hazard in the marketplace, and what happens when you take away, moral hazard take it away. Adam of the phrase, moral hazard is gone from a question on the Econ 101 test  Reading paragraph of every other story in the front moral hazard is such an important concept in its. I’ll be honest I’m very happy that at least one thing is this parade is on a lot more peoples Lipson and moral hazard comes up and in today’s conversation because at AIG the giant insurance company. Well, it’s a it’s in tocsin well earlier today that was rude to be at the federal government might come to the aid of AIG on the table and the stock market left with joy at the news and then the chairman of the federal reserve  Opposed to the concept of moral hazard any affect down yeah let’s let’s define moral hazard. If it sounds like I don’t know something that happens in Las Vegas but it’s actually something that to banks in the lake basically you and I at citizens Bank and her of the medicine we don’t want we want the people who run banks I think this is safe to say we want them to take risks but to bear the burden of those risks weed that’s how capitalism works that’s what creates economic growth people take risks and then they get the benefit of the rest when moral hazard isn’t exist. That’s when people take risks like bank presidents in a like if they make money of the wrist pays off , I get to keep the money if they sell them the government the taxpayer Delsym out this is bad for several reasons. What is Leah taxpayers? Don’t want our money going to other people, but even worse, it encourages people to take bigger risks because they’re not bearing the burden of the downside especially dumber risks dumber risks, more reckless risks, so  Soft sort of long-term wrist here is that we filled out how many institutions we might bail out another institution in five years from now 10 years from now whoever’s running whatever banking institutions are left at that time says hey, I’m gonna take that huge risk because if it pays off I get $1 billion you know bonus and if it doesn’t pay off I got the governments gonna help me out just like they did back in 2008 but all those other  we don’t want that but at the same time we don’t want the whole lab so that’s the argument in favor of taking the moral hazard risk him, and just bailing them out forward, Winda, Fannie, and Freddie. This is last weeks crisis, ancient history at this point, but when Fannie and Freddie were in danger of going under, there was a sort of a wink, wink nudge nudge nudge nudge at the these are private corporations, but you know they were created by the government, and the government sort of a kind of sort of stands behind their wrath  of the head to those companies took greater risk they didn’t keep as much money on hand to cover as they might have it well when they came up, there was no moral hazard to government building up. What are creatures of moral they’re different from Lehman brothers there since all these other, Fannie and Freddie were created the art of walking talking, screaming moral hazard American financial system for 70 years, because they are exactly what I describe a private company that gets the benefit of any risk but the government for 70 years has told the world like Yuseva to Lincoln, and that we’re going to take care of them if there’s anything bad , but why they took stupid rest I don’t think three years ago when Lehman brothers AIG are taking their stupid risks and Lex always remember some really stupid rest. I don’t think they were thinking the government will definitely be able to mow the Finian Freddy there a different animal they always knew the government was there, and so they have been moral hazard to the core from day one the other ones moral hazard has shown up  And the question of the day I guess maybe the question of the week is AIG the largest insurance company in the world and why I saw a couple of that but I never knew they were this big until this week. Are they too big to fit? Yeah, I mean I think you know on Sunday those and I will take those of us, because I can’t myself in this group who are concerned about this moral hazard issue in a wave  Lehman brothers be allowed to fail. We’re gonna let them fell, and certainly Henry Paulson the treasury secretary wanted to make a statement we’re done with the bail out game. You all are on your own now in Learning The maybe we’re not done it may be Lehman brothers just wasn’t quite big enough that they weren’t quite risky enough to be bailed out but AIG  AIG why would an insurance company so big it has nothing to do with like your auto policy or do you know your your life insurance policy? It’s something much more obscure they insure and they’ve gotten really big in this my last few years bonds and financial instruments this is this is like a little tiny pieces of insurance that they give to investment banks to other banks to all sorts of financial institutions around the world and now what we’re finding out is AIG issue that insurance, but doesn’t have the money it’s called a credit default swap. It’s not actually sure  Like insurance they don’t have the money to back up the claim crisis broke the bank banks people all over the world who thought they had insurance just like if you found out today oh, you don’t have an auto policy you don’t have a homeowners policy that might freak you out a little bit and I don’t wanna get into all the complexities in the short time we have here  But the freezer the global financial system and that’s the planet money podcast for today Wednesday, September 17 do you know where your money is call Chi you can reach us npr.org/money that’s where we are you can send us a note planet money, npr.org and if you want if you’re so inclined you can follow us on twitter.com. We are Planet Money take care . 

----
