---
title: 080925) Where Did All The Money Go
date: 20080925
tags: #PlanetMoney
citation: "“Planet Money,” _NPR_, 2 Juni 2023. [https://www.npr.org/podcasts/510289/planet-money](https://www.npr.org/podcasts/510289/planet-money) (diakses 4 Juni 2023)."
---

As Congress moves toward agreement on a bailout of Wall Street, a listener asks where all the money went. Plus: What, exactly, is money?'

----

Support for this NPR podcast in the following message come from better help online counseling by licensed professional counselors, specializing in issues including depression, stress and anxiety is it betterhelp.com/money to learn more and get 10% off your first month money podcast name Adam Davidson hear how you doing Good how are you? I’m OK I think we’re given the time and date on this week. It is Thursday, September 25 at 2:14 PM to latest big piece of music and six minutes ago. Looks like the Democrats and Republicans senate and the house, Congress in the White House for three at least in agreement , all on a bail out package $700 billion $700, billion that you will know more we know right now so we will leave it at that. We’ve gotten a lot of questions and we want more. We really find it very helpful to know what you are planet money on npr.orgtwitter.com/planetmoneyornpr.org/andre wants to know why is it AIG Lehman brothers, Freddie Mac, Fannie Mae, so many investment banks are all experiencing bankruptcy  And time something smells fishy to me so look under there is something fishy fishy is there is less money in the world that is what has happened between Cuba call Alden mobile. There was a huge explosion credit been given out home values were going up, which set a whole virtuous cycle it’s called him return thanks  Police with mint mobile economy pumped up to many more trillions of dollars than it was before between 2000 and 2007 massive what happened and now we were watching that giant balloon deflate a bit where were nowhere near where we were in 2000 but we have lost trillions of dollars  That is affecting every institution every business, every bank, the world but it’s affecting some more than others so they are all interrelated in and the impact of one impact the other for basically they are all victims. Also causes of ebbing tides yeah or the shaky ones faster in the ones that are Valenciano , Everett seems that we now have some kind of an agreement to curb executive paper bags to take a vantage of Adele out. Everett wants to know you mentioned we mentioned in past podcast worried that rather than stay at the beach to correct the mistakes some executives with leave or higher, paying position different companies. I know this is not all bad people but who would have them additional be able to negotiate a salary they can’t say if you don’t pay me what I want then I’ll stay where I’m at the job market as a market. Like any other supply and demand you are one of the handbook. People know how to run a huge large corporation. Then you are part of a very small group of people. I don’t know that it’s a good thing to have on your résumé that you ran a major bank that collapsed but I do think that a lot of these people are very smart, very capable and there will be many companies that want them, and possibly far more companies that want them then there  Are are available CEOs agreed but Smith talked about self sure he’ll be great to people. Generally thought you know I’m gonna take less money and serve to come and do it doesn’t seem to conform experience of more science for Sarah question a lot disaster is reversed pyramid. We have this narrow base of fault mortgages, holding up all these read it  Swaps all over the place. What did you just stabilize the beach give 5 million homeowners trouble on their mortgages $50,000 each to buy some time and find the stuff I don’t know that that is the exact solution that fit awful lot of the homeowner for closing part , of course many of the banks that are setting but we’re just giving 50,000 to everybody to give it only to the people who are struggling but aren’t those the people who took the biggest risk, so why are the people who didn’t take risks not benefiting their choosing, which investment firms are going to get about us. That’s why I thought there right and we don’t know how we’re gonna do , there are some solutions this level or than that one for example, just cut cut the cabs on that mutual fund and 401(k) investment. Just go ahead and get the government financing for the next year if you wanted to mutual funds in savings accounts and we will never pass that money to encourage us all to save a lot more money  System which provides money moving through the system available. I would love that and then it allows the market banks another idea of the government just buys the homes in foreclosure then out to the owner complicated time for the perfect. Danny has a question I think it has to do with the idea of oversight $700 billion bail out comes with a lot of power, the secretary of treasury to go ahead and buy what he likes to buy not buy with doesn’t like to buy any ask what the new president chooses on cabinet, which will include the secretary , this is this this is what Congress both Democrats and Republicans but we’re not giving as much power to Henry Paulson. We’re not give you this much power to someone we don’t even know who it is even know which president I’m gonna have to we haven’t seen the current builder evaluate  Democratic plan actually Waze give more power than the White House we had the other day. This is the single largest transfer power of the legislative branch powerful powerful. Where did all the money go that Wall Street firms made during housing? I know I don’t you know your house is worth 100 divided 100 years later your neighbor sells an identical house for 200, 200 grand gave you  Value is valuable as denominator than dollars and then a year later there’s I don’t know if your neighborhood really bad spelling a lot of crime in your house is back to $80 down to $80,000. No one burn pile of money that represents a different small amount of actual very small amount  Dollar bills dollar bills yeah and the dollar bills five if I have five bucks and I give it to you five bucks and then I can do that five bucks and then you give it to our friend Annie for a sandwich someone else we have added $20 to them to the economy with the same five dollar bill  Jessica corner of the office with back-and-forth. Increase the velocity of money all right so there’s less money it’s that simple. It’s a hard concept to grass but there is less people get rich somewhere. There are winners but if you add up the winners and that result in a lot more loser Williams $1. 20 trillion I mean every home in America  Credit card line less people find money in the world put the money in at the Wall Street firms made those dollar summons dollars are in peoples bank accounts or boats. Oh yes I mean some people need money along the way but the banks are worth tens of billions of dollars less today , usually there’s more money every day than it was the day before and then more every year. What is a month but there is generally more money every year than you fixed amount. It’s nothing there’s $1 million grows but every now and then crisis less if you’re holding up very well her out of her great job when wants to know, could you explain what might happen to normal people if financial system  Absences are you destined to become one of those hollow I’d go with pictures from the great depression affect more likely to be something dire like my credit cards are somewhere in between those two general late 70s US malaise may be a little worse than that. we are disco with you no pleasure in like that , the the nightmare scenario, the people started talking a while ago and that last week we thought we actually saw on Wednesday like next week library is about what happened to Dedi economy almost died what would happen the nightmare scenario is people banks don’t let money to other banks, businesses, virtually, no business in America access, credit access to a line of credit from the bank even if you’re a really healthy growing company  Cars this week are you bought that you painted your your front door or you did something to cost you a little more money for the line of credit every business does this all the time if there was no lending whatever you do for a living whoever pays you to do that doesn’t have the money to do it and whoever pays them they might have the money to do it next week won’t pay them  That aspect of it did not happen in the Great Depression we just do the language I hear is four. I don’t know I don’t know what happened scary or many many responsible time is it and I also would say I’ll have most of our money and see hopefully too is the government is on this maybe there’s lotta quibbles about what they’re doing and they might be spending more money than they need  But the great depression 1929 to 1933 not worse and worse that is not so I don’t think you even listening to NPR’s planet money podcast podcast episode. We also have a Laura npr.org/Adam Davidson Conaway. 

----
