---
title: 080917) Can You Pick a Politician on Economics
date: 20080917
tags: #PlanetMoney
citation: "“Planet Money,” _NPR_, 2 Juni 2023. [https://www.npr.org/podcasts/510289/planet-money](https://www.npr.org/podcasts/510289/planet-money) (diakses 4 Juni 2023)."
---


With the insurance big AIG on the ropes today, questions from listeners poured in. Mike Pesca joins Adam Davidson and Laura Conaway for another round of answers to queries from inquiring minds on Planet Money.

----

Support for this NPR podcast in the following message come from veteran online counseling by licensed professional counselor specializing in issues including depression rest of anxiety is it betterhelp.com/money to learn more and get 10% off your first month of crisis D3 this is the planet money podcast I’m Adam Davidson and how are you doing? We are trying this experiment with you tried yesterday and we liked it answering your questions what are you guys have questions we have a lot of questions yeah so what’s happening right now as we speak is that I think AIG is out there trying to get a deal with this at six minutes until four and September 16. Lehman brothers seems like it might at least have a small rescue package from Barclays bank. AIG giant insurer was supposed to be saved by construction of banks. It looks like that has fallen apart. We’re waiting to find out if the government that being or what’s gonna happen very first question straight from the apocalypse from Ari by retirement money is with Solomon Smith Barney how much should I worry should I take the hit and take out the money and keep it under my mattress or buy gold and keep it in a seat. Seriously are these legitimate concerns? These are certainly legitimate concerns of a huge mistake in my personal view to sell now I should say I’m not in a position to give financial advice , personal financial advisor, but it is a classic suckers move to panics sell during a crisis and if your own stocks, if you own a mutual fund you should own those for the long-term and overall overtime stocks go up, we have every reason to think stocks will go up again you shouldn’t be even looking and I don’t even look at my 401(k) statement during times like this I’ll look at it you know sometime around Christmas  If you lost your money in Fannie, Freddie forget it Jordi lobstermen oh yeah, if you only in stock if you owned Fannie and Freddie stock if you own Merrill lynch stock I mean that’s bacon that’s done look you don’t need to. There’s nothing to hide on your mattress is Mike passcode of your act like he’s about to strangle yes, no I just wanted to. I love the Yesterdays podcast that I just want to serve the function of if there’s something that confused me I want to jump in the really didn’t wanna own cold, literally by literal gold when I was watching easier  Easier now they exchange traded fund where you can get on your computer using Ameritrade very easily you can buy and sell gold all Dedi hearts content I don’t recommend it but it’s very easy to do without ever physically owning Kos‘s worth it questions see Burke what’s the what about potential class action suits for shareholders of Fannie Freddie Lehman Merrill AIG his understanding her understanding is a lawsuit against the CEO or Board of Directors would be paid by insurance company is this true? They were gonna be so many lawsuits show me shareholder lawsuits how many investor Lassiter  it will blow your mind and literally this is google securities lawsuit or investor lawsuit. You will find so many this is going to be a multi billion dollar business next question Patricia I think she’s talking about your talk today I’m talk of the nation I’m not sure, but if she’s asking?  FDI insurance for savings if you deposit in anyone’s bank is less than 100,000 you’re OK you want to count fined by the ownership of the counter by the account itself another word if you have an account with a child with two people what account what is that? I got this email earlier and I looked it up. I posted a link so it’s on npr.org/money to the FDIC website with a relevant information but I quickly summarize as I understand it I’m not a lawyer consult the FDIC  my understanding is this if I have an account in my name in a van and my wife and I have a account in our name at the same time and I also as a company I have my own company that’s a corporation I have that account three accounts three accounts each one of those is covered up to $100,000 because there’s three separate categories of ownership but if I myself have four accounts that’s just in my name that I had up to $120,000 only the first hundred thousand your one actor when you were one actor one category of ownership so I checking to savings account yet if I have a checking account or savings account each get 100,000 100,000  Count along with expose me to risk you working for me I’m kick all right Emily is 32 and working in a nonprofit ministration. She recently concluded that a masters degree would really increase my career opportunities in earning power. However, I’m worried I will accumulate a significant amount more debt. I want to find myself in a recession/depression economy. Any thoughts I think overall education is always good dramatically increases your long-term earning potential. We don’t predict the future here we don’t believe anyone who says they can so we don’t know how long there’s gonna be a recession, but you know they generally don’t last that long , the long-term flu the most pessimistic autonomous I talk to say bye and 2009 but should be picking up I can’t give you advice cause I don’t know enough about you advisor or anything but so far education is a really good idea from Key. I think this might be a yes or no question by 82-year-old dad used to work for E.F. Hutton as an account executive and he is currently receiving his pension check Lehman Brothers will he keep getting his pension checks my gut sympathy yes but this is some thing that is ugly about pensions they can get tied up in  The life so that I would OK Jim, what do you think of returning the highest income tax rate to 91% as it was back in the 1950s and 60s it seems to me that would remove the temptation to create wildly ruins investment products like toxic waste that seems like a shockingly awful suggestion  That’s one of us destructive things. I could possibly imagine like it’s pretty easy to imagine what would happen if if the high mean, I would say that a lot more has been game than lost by rich people wanting to become rich I think that you know rich people would have it  Either to leave the country altogether, or to spend an awful lot of their energy, avoiding paying income taxes promise greet in my view is the solution is greed, I mean for me the beauty of capitalism is that at its best it harnesses greed towards invisible hand, greater social purpose, so yeah, I think I can’t imagine carry. What can the federal government actually do to stabilize the financial market in the short term. They’re pumping tons of money in there for one thing, right? Yeah, I mean the thing is is the federal government do you know they could really eliminate the volatility and  Gonna bail out every institution that does poorly we are going to guarantee a fixed bottom to stock prices. We are going to guarantee all of the stuff Pram is what’s the cost the issue isn’t can the federal government do it? It’s what happens if the federal government is a direct cost  The taxpayers have to pay that bill and if it’s not us paying the bill, it’s our children and grandchildren paying the bill so that’s a direct cost but there’s an indirect cost capitalism works best when you take risks and you win if it succeeds and you lose if it fails if the federal government made the president that well if things get rocky enough we can  to come in and rescue everybody and we’re gonna make everything OK then people will take bigger risks they worry less about the downside to their actions so more moderate response. What are they doing to stabilize the market right now give me to he could small specific things. Nothing is small here by two discrete things settle. Government has done in the last couple of days  But one thing is something we didn’t do today they did not lower the interest rate so we thought that or some people thought there’s a good chance Bebeb would lower the interest rate today with that would do is effectively add more money to the economy which would mean that banks, and then other customers would feel like oh there’s more money out there we can borrow more or less money will grow more, but the Fed clearly thought that has a risk of causing inflation and also sending a signal that we’re always gonna be there to help you out when things get bad  For not doing that. Today was a very powerful and strong message that the Fed is not going to step in every time things get ugly and make things a little easier just one that’s one and the second thing they did was well this is a contradictory on Sunday. They said we are another thing they didn’t do not bailing out Lehman brothers, which was supposed to send a strong signal. The federal government is no longer gonna bail out big trouble financial situation , and as we speak for meeting with AIG and I might fill them out so if they did that presumably they would do that because they would think that the failure of AIG would be a large hit the system. Yes, Dan wants to know about mergers and acquisitions Bank of America soaking up Merrill Lynch. What are just be fewer larger companies that are “too big to fail yes, as a general rule having fewer bigger companies is not great it’s nice to have competition. It’s nice to have , you don’t want how are concentrated in a few small companies as a general rule what we maybe witness and this is all through the financial press is the death of the investment bank business since the great depression two different business models for banks, what is a regular bank the savings savings bank and Steve Bailey savings bank like from life I take your deposit. I lend it to Mike and the store. The investment bank model is much more is much different  Lead tech I mean at the cord it’s not a big own thing so you’re buys others structure money thing to do forms is sely people at some respect to the court thing though is that investment banks borrow money short term the bar money every day billions of dollars a day and lend it out Wonka they do that because you can borrow money cheaply overnight, and lend it out for more over the long term they can’t survive a bad afternoon. They are every day they have to re-borrow all of their money, and if the market loses confidence in him  a few hours for a panic yeah boo where is an actual commercial savings bank actually have wealth so they are more rugged so there’s a Ian will see you there. Only two investment banks left on Friday of last week there a four year ago they were five big brother :-) let’s say that yesterday’s ago I became a single issue boater presidential election and I want what is a candidate I would vote for either one white thing about how to handle this economic crisis. What sorts of things would you look for one of these two candidates to say or maybe the answer is actually it’s just  if I could imagine my dream candidates, it would be first of all as president there’s not a whole lot I can do that would lose you so many votes but of the things I can do here’s what I will do. I will appoint a really great that chairman and let that do it’s job I’m not gonna tell him what to do. I’m gonna let him be politically , I don’t know if I’m gonna raise taxes or cut spending but I’m gonna do something to make sure that we spend less money than we get. No budget upset you wanna know I’m OK with budget up but less of you know, so OK I’m going to just tell everyone the trade is good trade helps America in the more trade the better for America. There’s gonna be some people who are hurt in the short run, but even they are going to benefit in the long trade is good. Trust me on this , I’m going to unilaterally lower trade barriers. I’ve already eliminated even the right winning you’ve lost almost every voter except you know the Colombian Harvard business school guy what about regulation of them say more or less is not the way to talk about regulations, smart and stupid, right I guess yeah  More isn’t good. Either I mean I think Mark regulation is the way to go could get into some of the things that I think of Hartono you know I’m not saying on the last word of faith, that the parts of our economy act like insurance companies like Tino, or somebody learning, that investment banks, kind of act like insurance companies for the rest  of economy but maybe they should be quite as leverage does the work maybe they should be a change there I think that there are an awful lot of kind of arbitrary and stupid rules like this Mark to market accounting, where every financial institution every day pass to put a number on exactly how much it’s worth that day, even if there’s no  if it creates a barrier to acting in a destroys company initiative, some of those numbers are sold their basement area I hear populous rhetoric like let’s taxi, oil, companies, and Wall Street. Greed is tomato listen, helpful silly I mean obviously John McCain, you know his homicidal fine hopefully when he says the fundamentals of our Konomi, a strong the day the two of four investment banks, disappear  as the people people are strong and excused by oh it’s actually just a platitude right it’s either a platitude for an ignorant I think in the middle of the worst days of the sub time crisis when he said what this needs more than anything is less regulation I don’t think that’s necessarily but we need him, so yeah, I mean I think when you the more you understand economics in Matthew the less, you can really listen to any politician, Hugman for Brad the long on the left and any number of people on the right  Don’t see how they get into Kevin. How do you how do you get into lightning Rose so she’s noticed at the markets at least in the US are holding relatively steady maybe even gaining what “good news is this based on is there a silver lining or happy ending somewhere that I’m not aware of the markets the general Paul is upwards. Do you know if you look over the autograph over the last hundred years or whatever down  And look at the graph looks like a blip, and we assume that we’re in a blip. So overall the silver lining of weed high, most people who run the economy but you don’t have confidence in the long-term viability of the system. Also, there are sectors that are doing great. This is a fabulous time to be an agriculture. It’s a fabulous time to be exporting things to the rest of the world , so you know it’s not a great time to be a financial company. It’s a wonderful time to be an American wine that’s a wonderful time to be an American auto parts much better than it was, which brings us to Chris, who is noting economic bubbles and the tendency of economy to have the checkbook stock mobile home value bubble, he says, have you call me always been so bubble beast and watch the next sector vulnerable  They have been bubbles since the dawn of capitalism that I’ve been bubbles for a long time it does seem a little quick, a little high-tech to big bubbles right now row there is an argument that they’re actually the same bubble. We don’t know what the next bubbly theory that it’s not green technology you know bye-bye it’s very nature a bubble is a timer  Believe that the world has fundamentally change the whole rules no longer, so where will that happen next I don’t know so we saved a haymaker for you right now RR how to speak oil apocalypse put into our financial collapse. How far off are we from a long emergency or world made by hand type collapse  And he coil for those don’t know very popular on the Internet that basically we had we are not gonna fight with you. We have reached the maximum amount of oil and from here on out it’s just less than less oil. Yeah price goes up and up and aren’t gonna be able to have cheap energy and a whole system , they have been many many times in the last couple hundred years that we have been told we’ve reached the end of our system for one reason I don’t buy it I think that yes energy might be more expensive or possible although it’s worth noting that $180 barrel oil  And there’s a lot of really smart mind working energy. I just I think peoples minds when they don’t understand. Somethings to go to absolute worst possible scenario I don’t think I think we’re fine. I think a year from now two years from now three years from now and then years from now I’m not gonna be able to get on the radio people are gonna listen to podcast as much  Podcast or not yet you got 31 seconds home we are on the phone with Rocky property is another word that people use for the radical volatility let me just quickly I will end unless we are something like 20 years into a new financial system starting in the 80s really hitting straight in the 90s  Leap forward in this decade new financial system, complicated financial instruments, all the stuff by Ciara but collateralized debt obligations and some other things. These are new things we haven’t figured out yet any new technology, the printing press, paper, money, metal money, democracy take a while to figure out early stages of this financial school. I think the smart people who I trust him  Convinced me that his tools are good tools are used very poorly and this is the first major hiccup. This is very standard to try something out. Screw it up real badly and then you think boy I gotta use it a little more intelligent hopefully hopefully that’s what is happening so weird npr.org/moneynpr.org/money we are eager for your question Sita Airport clean  Money at NPR 

----

