---
title: 080912) Global Nightmare - If Fannie or Freddie Had Failed
date: 20080912
tags: #PlanetMoney
citation: "“Planet Money,” _NPR_, 2 Juni 2023. [https://www.npr.org/podcasts/510289/planet-money](https://www.npr.org/podcasts/510289/planet-money) (diakses 4 Juni 2023)."
---

Whatever the cost to taxpayers, foreign financial ministers tell us the U.S. Treasury had no choice but to save Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac. They say it was either act now or face economic Armageddon. 

Financial markets around the world got a little breathing room this week, after the U.S. government announced it would bail out the troubled mortgage agencies Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac.

An estimate in July from the Congressional Budget Office suggested the rescue could cost American taxpayers anywhere from zero to $100 billion — with the likeliest total being $25 billion.

That may sound like a lot, but economists argue that the cost of not saving Fannie and Freddie would have been far, far greater. Together, the agencies hold loans of $5 trillion. That's the largest debt ever held by any private company in history. It's larger than any other country's debt, with the exception of that of the United States.

Allowing Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac to collapse would have been akin to letting Japan or the United Kingdom go bankrupt. Global economic leaders say even those unimaginable scenarios would have paled beside the fallout from a Fannie/Freddie implosion.

"The bankruptcy of Fannie and Freddie would have meant Armageddon," said Domenico Siniscalco, former finance minister of Italy. He added, "Meltdown of the financial system, the global financial system."

Siniscalco attended a conference for former finance ministers this week at the University of Virginia. Next to him was Tim Adams, a former U.S. Treasury undersecretary. Adams is not known for dramatic overstatements. Asked about a hypothetical collapse of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, he seemed at a loss for words. "Oh, wow, it would be..." his voice trailed off. "Credit markets would seize [up]."

Adams explained that many banks around the world own bonds from the mortgage agencies. If those bonds were suddenly worth far less, the banks would stop giving out loans of any kind. Consumers wouldn't be able to borrow money to buy homes, cars or basic goods. Entrepreneurs wouldn't be able to get financing for their ideas.

"If you can't borrow, you can't run your business," Adams said. "You can't go to school. You can't expand. And, therefore, the economy stops."

As the U.S. economy has faltered over the past year, some have speculated about whether things could get as bad as the Great Depression. If Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac had failed, I asked Adams, would things get as bad as that epic period of economic misery? Or worse?

"It would certainly be the event of our lifetime," he said, "and probably be felt for a very long period of time." By long, he means decades — "at least."

Every finance minister interviewed for this story said U.S. Treasury Secretary Henry Paulson had no choice but to step in. Paulson may have saved Fannie and Freddie, but America's economic reputation has taken a hit.

"For such a long period of time, the U.S. was a force for stability in world markets," said Peter Costello of Australia. "Here's an example of the U.S. exporting instability."

Costello argued that international investors now will be more wary about investing in the U.S. It's hard to know exactly what that will mean for average people — or how long the suffering will continue. One result may be a period of fewer new factories opening and lower wages overall.

Some of the former foreign finance members did point to one silver lining. They said the U.S. has lost some of its power of persuasion. For them, that's a plus.

"It's a good week for India," said Yashwant Sinha. For years, he said, the U.S. and others told him that India's financial system is too backward, too closed off from global finance. "Every consultation told us we are not managing our affairs properly. And now everyone is looking at India as an example of cautious managing of the economy and cautious opening up."

Sinha and the others expressed agreement that the American economy still dominates the world by a great margin — just not as great a margin as a few months ago.

----

https://www.npr.org/2008/09/09/94424809/global-nightmare-if-fannie-and-freddie-had-failed

Totally avoid it is really that’s Jon Snow he was president pushes treasury second ago and I’m Adam international business and economics first planet this is the planet money podcast where we try to take a confusing economic issues of the day and make them a little less confusing I am in Charlottesville Virginia this is Tuesday, September 9 just a couple days after the rescue a Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac and I came last minute on Sunday because there is a conflict form or finance minister from around the world what is your country by the way I’m tempted to give a full explanation of Freddie Mac but that takes a while we have a Lotta nerve block/money you’re the highlights these are private companies work till Sunday created by the US government though government agencies they were created with the market possible for more people to own America is been a very organization private profit-seeking companies forget money for shareholders in at the same time they are trying to promote a public mission there are many people who think this is untenable think Jon Snow is very much one of them throughout his time and stretch receptors you try to kill them both to try to convince Congress horrible, dangerous organizations driving United States government to an affect orchestrate a large hedge fund arbitrage in both the low interest rates. The government makes available that’s not how private enterprise is supposed to work for private room is from that, but the losses always gonna come back to the taxpayers now. Well our system doesn’t work well aware that the gains are privatized but the losses are born by you and me and John Q public is the taxpayers not that’s what’s got an amp and it is that the management of these entities head were simply to borrow and borrow and borrow, and become bigger and bigger and bigger, and play the hedge fund game with the taxpayers just is not appropriate to have the taxpayers of holding the bag for private management. Should we just can’t let companies become to pick gotta find a way to prevent it’s too big to fail from coming into in the quiet and one way you do that is to make it clear that the government is it gonna stand behind because if you make it clear, we’re not gonna stand behind these and these in the management will be much more discipline what what happened or that we out of a job is a failure of risk management, but you can understand how how you take more risk is if you think you’re not gonna be the consequences this is the classic example of what economist call moral hazard  of the risks lie with somebody else you get the games that’s a bad formula. Imagine you had Fannie and Freddie collapse of the US didn’t didn’t protect what would that be like you can ask please finance minister’s around your home finance minister it would be an awful lot of frowns there be a stage  police action false and did what he had to do it’s inconceivable he wouldn’t stand behind it. Would that have been the most damaging thing in history to the US economic financial I don’t know about history, but it would’ve been if it clearly would’ve been far reaching implications for the US, and for the whole global global economy is a bankruptcy off credit  meltdown of the financial system, global finance system standing right next to treasury secretary, Jon Snow secretary is former finance minister of Italy Domenico Simmons Calco he I should note works as a senior fellow at Merrill Lynch. The company that advised the treasury department in the takeover is one of the cases where market cannot look after it says so too bad we had that here by the Des Plaines. It was the only option what would’ve happened in Italy if Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac cannot even think about that I would imagine big John Sinta writes tremendous impact on confidence, so I’m not a vehicle  head very very negative repercussions. I don’t see why we’re talking about two companies that underwrite mortgages in the US why did European is it because Europe happens to own a lot of Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac that told me because Sumanty is fine and Freddy with them disgracefully failed the impact of the US rates and have Nlmat  substantial suppose we all met US treasury I suppose we all met US firms as we do that for Casamigo through the channel so you don’t need to own anything by Fannie Mae or Freddie Mac exactly the huge too big they are too big to fit too big to fail so I don’t understand what that means  doesn’t mean they’re too good they would run in that they were ubiquitous, and everyone held their assets they were in Normas let me quit that’s Tim Adams former under secretary of the treasury for United States. He basically was America’s chief financial diplomat, and I’ve known him over the years really smart guy and this is the most hyperbolic the most  exclamations of the size fails think about a portfolio that’s $5 trillion it’s half the size of the US economy a large fraction of the global economy self when you have something of that magnitude that is so systemically important it can have a important fact is just even small variations in the price, but just to let him go would have I wouldn’t say cataclysmic, but you run the risk of your cataclysmic. Sarah conditions describe cataclysmic , how would my life be different? How would life on the movie a beautiful life in different from the other person economy has run on credit and that means for a campus like this it’s student loans it to the university that borrow Stefan expansions and buildings for hospitals for businesses that that provide services to this university, or any city the municipality robot absolutely Diah Charlottesville, Aveda school, borrowing authority credit markets would scenes with with Ceysa. Would you be in the mortgage industry with Ceysa but I would think it would be across-the-board. I think it would be so sad if they were to collapse, it would be such a systemic  set of conditions that credit markets generally would either stop functioning or the price that you would have to pay tomorrow would be so it’s all music people with softball and if you can’t borrow you can’t run your business can’t go to school you can’t run a university can’t expand and therefore they can’t yourselves  the economy stops. We are built on credit and that’s what runs the economy squat runs the real economy it’s what every businessman every business woman gets up every day they need they need credit to just run their daily operations, just cash flow, Oregon to expand without access the credit economy  to start if they were to have collapsed the obviously with directly affect mortgage is good with the tech confidence Fridley in the system runs on confidence confidence dissipates to Fannie Freddie collapses is the great depression bad is it late 70s bad it’s hard to scribe because of what other events might occur as well, but it would certainly be the events of our lifetime, and probably be felt for a very long. At least , the scary which is why I hate Paulson really had no choice and it was a matter of win and he did what he had to do it. It’s not it’s not a popular movies, but it was one that had to be taken out. Ultimately are done with him and that’s afraid to the next president has not really impacted upon institutions in India. This is Joshua Sinha . How do you say he is the former finance minister for India, that your colleague from Italy told me that Europe it would be an apocalypse. It would be Armageddon India is not like that no, no I think in India, we have a learn the lesson to essence slowly he he managed to insulate Casas from all the global crisis by lack, but now that modern more integration is taking place. Some impact is in a bit, so we are trying to be as careful as possible , just wait there if anything Freddie Mac collapse you know quickly McVie effective directly. This is Dr. Yuseva mad at him. He’s quit trouble and the troubles of the magnitude of the crisis, the financial crisis actors in the US market in there in the world market and during this period means that says really  foot lines in the system that is also to be fixed. It seems that there are still we didn’t reach the bottom as I said, and I don’t know if this will lead us to see a light at the end of the tunnel what they did this week I hope this wouldn’t will help in any of the problem but at least I hope it will lay down  the road to survive this crisis in Shalla Shalla all right I was just showing off my Arabic there in Shalla. That means God willing Arabic. I also got a chance to talk to Ali Alaoui. He was Iraq’s first post Saddam know that tree minister later he was defense minister, and later finance does Finian Freddy affect the rock not on the surface now because we’re not really integrated into the only way he should I connect to the store  closes at the central bank as far as I know, has no cause I got the death penalty wouldn’t be the biggest problem for a rock right now but it’s not too hot. You have other coffee is probably the guy just conference who spoke the harshest at least about the United States, was Peter Costello from Australia  opposition I think for such a long period of time the US was global marketing. Here is an example of the US actually exporting instability. Thank you for listening I get an Adam Davidson with national public radio. Please go to npr.org/money we have a lot of information links to other pieces of audio to Ravensdale photos all sorts of things that help you to help understand the global economy. Please let us know how we’re doing. Does this help you understand what can we do better global economy at npr.org. We really want to make this work so please do give us advice giver thoughts? Give us feedback thank you , what is that you had done five years in the subprime mortgage market in the United States that people with bundled instruments, Apple devices that you sold them around the world in those flavors of nearby, export it around the world, and this is been a problem at all regulation in the United States until the US can work through. It will affect global financial market  value thought of the US as as the bed rock solid foundation of the global economy and now you’re doing well will US is is always been the worlds largest financial market and for most of the period of the 20th century explored and a lot of the imported cattle has actually been lost in the subprime mortgage situation so we took the rest of the world money and lost it for them yeah  the mortgage originator of my bad lines I did all the salt and soul to US institution through seven situations around the world windows windows. It’s really nice I’m glad salons movie just went down institutions around the world lost money. Did Australia lose money? Why is there a financial institutions in Australia , fortunately with a well regulated financial system nothing I situations has failed or country today. Then we were we can go look the the US is still on lunch to come in the world. It has the largest and deepest financial markets, but those magazine had a big stellar are we less important? I don’t think you useless important job, but in the global Konomi up to , tomorrow other players are becoming more significant particular you 

----
the gains are privatize and the risk democritize
tax payer 

cant have a bank become too big too fail
a failure of risk management
risk on somebody else, gain on you

meltdown of economic financial system
market can't look after itself
two company underwrite mortgage in US, 
you don't need to own product but still affected
too big too fail, a portofolio half economy of US
global economy is run on credit, municipality, credit market would seize.
if collapse, the economy stopped, world run on credit
it would affect confidence

hank paulson don't have a choice
on next president

in india, manage isolate itself, still have some impact

the faultlines in system need to be treated

australia
the US is importing instability
problem on regulation
US is always largest financial market
a lot of the imported capital lost on subprime mortgage
when collateraled asset lose value, all country lose money
