---
title: 080926) The Week America's Economy Almost Died
date: 20080926
tags: #PlanetMoney
citation: "“Planet Money,” _NPR_, 2 Juni 2023. [https://www.npr.org/podcasts/510289/planet-money](https://www.npr.org/podcasts/510289/planet-money) (diakses 4 Juni 2023)."
---

Economists and players on Wall Street say the American economy suffered a near-death experience last week, when the credit market began seizing up.

----

https://www.npr.org/sections/money/2008/09/hear_the_day_americas_economy.html

Support for NPR and the following message come from iHeartRadio, some newest financial podcast Cash Money, join Jason Piper and Nicole, laughing as they debate how many impacts our lives listen and subscribe on Apple podcasts, the iHeartRadio app or wherever you get your podcasts. Hello and welcome to NPR‘s planet money podcast today is Friday, September 26 it’s about 5:27 PM and what week right now Congress is still talking over that $700 billion bill out what was proposed by White House. You remember him wanted some kind of legislation passed by today, Friday and on Thursday when we went home it looked a lot like President Mike it’s just that and then Alabama republican Richard Shelby Congressman supposed to recess for the election after today and now they seem to be sticking around talk talk talk about that Bella, so will congress passed a bill balance or not I don’t know I’m coming at you with several segments today. The last one is a doozy it’s Adam and Alex on the week economy nearly died  at a computer model drawn up in the 1980s drawn up by none other than in Bernanke the guy chairman of the federal reserve his motto predicts you know the worst and the worst timer has the introduction. Wouldn’t it be great if there were a crystal ball you could consult about our economic well as you could ask it will there be a recession how bad should we launch a $700 billion rescue mission well the closest thing we have in the real world our computer models we have them for the weather, and it turns out  if I can when was written by a guy named Ben Bernanke you know him now as chairman federal reserve NPR‘s David? They put the computer model is called the financial Excelerator. I want to see it at the office and Mark professor of economics at New York University griller worked with Ben Bernanke on it in the 1980s I was hoping for a sort of video game like that SimCity thing when I asked her to show me the model he started to print something out . He turns out he and Bernanke were equations guys not programmers for that highly intelligent the research paper you print out is filled with what looks like physics equations are there people in your computer mouth yeah, there are people in their phones now there are lots of models of various aspects of the economy. This one is sort of unique because it was designed to incorporate the rippling effects of sharks to the financial system exactly what’s going on ultimately, we would like to be able to make precise predictions. Yes, we know the economy will get into trouble or can’t get into trouble  to be able to say how much, so does the model say? Do you know we’re heading for doomsday and less sad, roughly speaking yes model calculates. How is shocked the system like the credit crisis happening now might snowball dangerously for example, in a credit crisis it’s hard to borrow money to take out a loan. You have to agree to pay a lot  Result is that people and companies have less money so they spend less economy slow. The problem is this is the feedback on it so I slow down to make houses, worthless companies, worthless, which makes even harder for everyone to borrow money because their collateral is worthless. The whole cycle begins again . Elevator sort of a financial decelerator in my wife said, but we called accelerator because it’s an amplifier now I know what you’re thinking how can I computer model and economy millions of people on making their own sometimes crazy decisions other economist take the models predictions with a big gram song but they also can’t resist asking what it has to say. Cutler says there is a reason to hear this morning. He did a good job explaining what happened during the southeast Asia financial crisis of the late 1990s South Korea’s gross domestic product plunged 12% more than half of that the model says is due to the financial accelerator problem , the logic behind the model is definitely affecting Ben Bernanke he talked about it there’s no question about it. I mean the one well they only good news is the financial Excelerator. Siri seems to be working, so darn it we were right serious thinking, and really motivated. Otherwise things get very bad very fast Cutler has an asked the model to predict what comes next but his colleague Simon Gilcrest at Boston University, was work on the project beginning, has been training the model on data for the past 20 years I haven’t really cricket  Mobile the poly I’m exercising but what am I listening currently is that weird to be crowned in other words growth would be 2% higher if we didn’t have this problem one other question he wants to ask the model about that $700 billion the administration says it needs to fix the economy. Is that enough  MPR News we’re always glad to hear from David Customer next up is Daniel Costello. He’s a Busines reporter from the LA times Daniels on his way to grad school in Columbia. Need to cover the petrol prices Daniel Daniel talk to true libertarian sold today sky Thomas, Farid is the managing editor of a magazine, top regulation, and his part of the libertarian Cato institute Christafari about some of the common assumptions in this week, including the idea that America can’t afford to let it die , there’s a concern about that very large bank very large organization political way to economic wage. Be careful about breaking makes up most of the bank failure think that was part of what happened to you running this morning, correct to the great depression, regulation middle of this economic storm regulation about regulation regulation regulation  should let them get bigger this morning, correct diversified price, geography to be regulation, small any bad harvesting to the bank, shocking in the middle of this economic storm in regulation about credit credit regulation, regulation regulation in the solution is regulation cells that whenever something bad happened to the government and we all have to dig deeper and carefully monitor board personal regulators government housing market forgery under and now that’s why we’re having a look for it so I am getting the sense that it is very troubling and then Twitter while you were at that we think that maybe some free market well given the big deal and now for the big deal, the appetizer, entrée and dessert, all rolled into one how did Davidson and Alex Bloomberg put the story together for all things considered tonight  to be almost died. Hello Siri what is Peterson doesn’t work on Wall Street he’s in Memphis got nothing to do with the mortgage the last weekend in Chicago for those of you. You don’t have experienced earthquake experience because you realize there’s a power out there no control over whatsoever massively moving everything last week. Last week there was a monster that was on Waze  market which is the most liquid market probably in the world basically froze up commercial paper. That’s the monster that wrenched his soul. Yeah I mean well it turns out commercial paper kind of short term loan that you’ve never heard of but that helps make the world go round, and Mark Peterson knows that  because he’s treasurer of Servicemaster with John from another things, lawn care, company, merry maids in Terminex, which I’ll get rid of your termite see that you had to come out your house you write a check to our billing system goes in March paid so every day and 1000 Terminex customers and other people ours are writing checks and you should’ve had the position of like what’s with the cash position out for the day and in this company yeah either we’re gonna have too much money at the end of the day or we’re not gonna have enough money at the day like today do you do you have money do you need me today? Our company we have money for tomorrow they may not. It’s not big deal to buy a lot of termite poison for upgrade. The fleet of termite fighting band. Every company works like this Sunday to have extra money some days they need to borrow. If you were a regular person can use your credit card. If you were a gigantic company, you use the commercial paper market away of borrowing a lot of money  today I’m gonna give you $1 million tomorrow if you give me $999,000 today got it so tomorrow $999,000 in tomorrow until every day treasure is Oliver America, and all the world are getting into the office at 8:30 serving set up like the data and then they’re going in the issuing commercial paper help how much money are we talking about do you think  every day every single day that you’ve never heard of this Bob as a reason it’s been a relatively boring business. Be somebody down at home with a clerical level calling every single day and Merrill Lynch and saying I need to borrow 50 million in what way can I borrow at that rate and let’s get it done by 11 o’clock in the morning if it’s not being boring sometime this year  and last year most of the banks they want to come in and I want to raise $2 billion. This is Tom corona addition financial in lower Manhattan is also unfortunately not at all bored these days. These companies call when they want to borrow for termite company to call him or banks, and I can usually gets pretty low rate is it good to last week? Thanks for paying usually race hard to get money and even when they were hazy race even if they could get my vehicle we get 5100,000,000 I don’t me  like a little but now I’m walking it’s nothing it’s it’s so small these thanks normally at attach Richard Reyes billions in an eye blink. This is what happened last week the terrify, treasury secretary, Henni Paulson, that shift and Bernanke and President Bush. This is not a bunch fundamental flow of our economy bring down money start moving big safe, respected companies that was far away from all the subprime problems. Had trouble getting the short term loans they needed to pay their bills. I don’t think I’ve ever been this nervous in my career  financial system was so close to walking up. I think we were real close to do this. This is public of Daiwa security. We talked with him to figure out why this happened why couldn’t companies borrow money he watch this meltdown from what he calls courtside seats, although when your phone trader courtside seats me the chair in front of a computer screen with lots of numbers on lotto numbers and what happened at scared him so much is it for the first time ever dreaded events on Wall Street hurt a money market mutual fund broke the back, so what does that mean? A money market fund is like a savings account there’s a good chance you have one. It’s even more boring than commercial paper. It is in normal time seen as totally safe pretty much no Rest  thousand bucks and you know for sure you’ll get 1000 bucks out. Hopefully you’ll get some interest but you’ll never lose any money. That’s the key. If you do lose money, that’s called breaking the buck last Monday, the oldest money market mutual fund in existence, the reserve fund broke the buck and people freaked out making the bunkers  Riverlake up having a circle cause a little bit and take a look at some of the returns people people are not concerned about getting every turn on chapel. They just want to dial return of capital so that that is panic that is here so people took your money out of money market mutual funds. They were afraid they were gonna lose all that money and what is the main thing money market mutual funds on commercial paper for short term loans to big corporations  matter how safe and trusted a company was for a few hours last Wednesday and Thursday. They couldn’t Armani the way they normally have commercial paper because of people running money market mutual funds were too busy freaking out and not lending any money. First, we can tell this is one of the biggest things I convince Paulson in Bernanke that things have gone too far with this one on for one more day the economy would start to shut down once again call Malika what would happen if no one will be able to borrow money and then and then  ordering and I’m not working Kaplan end it. The keyword there is almost the commercial paper market has been off since last Wednesday. We just call Tom Feronik he said today things took a turn from really bad to even worse exactly nothing is trading on otherwise department, many lines of credit from the bank. I fear that someday those lines of credit will freeze to possible , Ben Bernanke said that could be worse than the great depression, but there are other economists and respected ones will tell you that’s not true that some businesses will eventually start lending her money when the price is right eventually it’ll work itself out maybe right now today that is the $700 billion question Adam Davidson, NPR news  I’m Alex Cooper that’s it for today in Planet Money we hope you’re doing OK out there crazy few days. Glad for the chance to spend with you. Keep those questions and comments coming at npr.org/money will be back with more answers next week. I’m Laura Conaway you take care . 

----
