---
title: 080909) How Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac Met China
date: 20080909
tags: #PlanetMoney
citation: "“Planet Money,” _NPR_, 2 Juni 2023. [https://www.npr.org/podcasts/510289/planet-money](https://www.npr.org/podcasts/510289/planet-money) (diakses 4 Juni 2023)."
---

Economist Brad Setser obsessively studies the way China buys American debt. If the buying stops, he says, the American economy would be in trouble — and the laws of economic logic suggest that's almost inevitable.

----



The affordable than in the following message come from Jess works just works and helps teens of all sizes. Get access to high-quality affordable, benefits, automated table, playing support, and HR tools all in one place get two months free when you go to jessworks.com/Budi, China and the US are in a crazy codependent relationship. We keep buying stuff from China with our dollars. Then China turns around and lens those dollars right back to us so we can then buy some more stuff from China but what you might not know and I didn’t know until very recently is that Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac those two companies you’ve heard a lot about lately they are centrally are crucial to that whole recycling of money process they make it happen or at least they help make it Happen.

  

I’m gonna explain in a second but first let me tell you I am Adam Davidson international economics correspondent for national public radio and I’m just starting to run something new here in NPR. We’re calling it planet money and our goal is to take the big complex global economic issues that kind of thing I think most people feel like they really should know a lot about and understand but they don’t and they get really confused. Well Artha job here or what we’re trying to do is to make this all easier for you we’re working really hard and hopefully will succeed the time to help you understand how the world economy works and how it affects your life and right now this right here is our first ever podcast

  

right so today I’m going to talk to Brad Setser he’s with the counseling farm relations. He’s an economist used to work in the treasury department and you should be glad I’m talking to Brad because he knows this financial interdependent relationship between the US and China better than anyone I can think of over the years. He has really helped me understand how the US and China financial system works and let me just give you the basic idea before we get to Brad, so you buy a DVD player or T-shirt or something made in China you give your dollars to the store they take those dollars and give them to some importer who brought the thing into the country the importer take some of that money and send a check to China to the factory that made whatever it is you bought to think of it from the factory owners perspective he’s in China. He’s getting all these dollars but he has employees he has electric bills. He has all this stuff in China so he doesn’t want dollars. He wants the Chinese currency renminbi so what the factory owner does if he takes those dollars and he brings them to his local bank. There are lots of banks. he says he has a bunch of dollars I want renminbi now the bankers dollars but they don’t really want dollars cause all their customers one renminbi so every day this happens every day every business day all the local banks in China at around four or five in the afternoon they send a message to call or email to Central Bank the peoples Bank of China and they said we’ve got a lot more dollars in today and we don’t want them we want renminbi the central bank says all right that’s fine give us your dollars and will send you some renminbi into every day. The peoples Bank of China gets a huge pile of new dollars that they have to do something with and Brad is going to tell us in a minute how many dollars is a lot so peoples Bank of China. Don’t wanna just hold onto dollars dollars don’t earn interest they want some kind of investment but they don’t want any investment. They don’t want some speculative tech stock or some hedge fund because they’re a central bank they need. to keep this money they need to know it’s safe so the number one thing they want is US government debt treasury bonds, but believe it or not, however, big are dead isn’t it is big there aren’t enough treasury bonds to satisfy China’s hunger, so the peoples Bank of China buys the next best thing which it turns out is Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac bonds those bonds as it happened, are made up of bundles of US home mortgages probably your mortgage, maybe put all together in a package, and then sold as bonds know China doesn’t particularly care that these were bonds back my home mortgages. They just like to these bonds were considered really safe in the big gave some return that we in America and many of us. We love this process because what affectively is happening is every dollar we sent to. China goes through this chain of people and then comes back to us in the form of mortgages than Americans. Use those mortgages obviously to buy houses then they own their houses they take out loans against the houses home equity lines of credit and they buy a lot more Chinese made stuff and see how this cycle works and hopefully now you see how Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac are central to this whole cycle  in the person who knows how all of this works better than anybody is Brad Setser well probably get some guy in the people Michael Chyn about that guy I don’t know who it is and what he probably wouldn’t talk to us anyway so we’re very happy to have Brad I started out by asking him how big is this whole thing how much money are we talking about? I think it is reasonable to sync the Chinese vine over the bottom of the last 12 months roughly $400 billion in US debt that’s a lot over a year over year so that’s I’m just doing the math is that per business days is that her business day it’s about yo tutoring dollars a day  that sounds like a lot to me. It is a lot at $40 billion is ballpark of the same size is a US fiscal deficit is ballpark, the same size as you as well import door. It is larger right now send it no noil trade deficit. What is a phenomenal so much money I think of you as the leading guy studying how much US money China has  very polite way of saying I’ve been obsessed with this question for the last five years that’s the main thing you’re right about you have with a China reserve watch her Jeni I spent a lot of time trying to figure out Jay just how much how large is China’s purchases of US funds were and are why are you say  US government selling it to them? It’s a big Chinese government buying them. Can’t you just look it up somewhere only the world with that simple. Oh no, you actually can’t their US government doesn’t actually sell directly to the US government sells a lot of bonds to the broker dealer community the primary dealers, why are treasuries fax fixing big bags  big and Mika can I see Morgan household names that we would big core of the USA play by Apple Audubon and then they sell them to the bank and 1 and in the bank in London sells Le Bon to try to central bank. The US can track the amount of death of issues and a contract for sale with bonds to foreigners, but in the first instance, it thinks it’s old Devon to a private/constitution in London and it has no way of knowing then where that long if that  is trying to not want us to know there’s like is there a building full of guys are four full of guys in Beijing who are just on the phone to London all the time saying hey, we need another this is have someone explain it to me in China that is the end of every day that the reserve manager and institution of the great state, a ministration of women  exchange safe and they they are there. The guy gets a call from my other peoples Bank of China today we ended up we bought $2 billion in the market do you have another $2 billion that you need to put to work and then he knows OK well I will use bonds mature expiring as I already holding a 1.8 trillion reserves so certain amount of that is calm paid on some of the loans and bars a lot now little bit more minute  and sense of the end of the business day in China USA to sleep the natural thing. Hey how many bonds can you tell me I’m in that process it was on a day after day another problem it’s hard to track it from the USA USA, then you have to go to the Chinese Chinese data and try to figure out how much China’s for an asset to Ghana. Well try to central bank is actually really slow and Elisa with reserves  a quarter by release it he just made a publish how much how much they hold and I don’t want to go into the details about how many of your websites you need to visit in order to try to get a good estimate of how much money to state exam I don’t speak. Mandarin have a friend who dies Ness the only way you can possibly find some  basis for doing the estimate. Where is that what you’re doing all the time calling up a friend and begging them to go in the Mandarin language VOCs website sometimes yeah yeah another mean so there’s dozens of weird Chinese you know the Chinese agricultural the data on the foreign exchange system  define plan but in the hard part is you never quite know where the increase is going to show up in what data series and sometimes it changes around why are you so obsessed with us? Why not? What why do you wanna know so badly a deep puzzle about the global economy  one is that a relatively poor country normally think about the money before the other way around and it is a countries find the poor countries just like rich bags, one for people, rich banks, fun, rich people as well if you found out at Citibank, was you know some guys make Frank and queens was funding Citibank  but it’s also a very fast growing economy which is financed. Also, perhaps not the way I mean I’m hearing this is an intellectual curiosity like you could do crossword puzzles instead how much US debt the Chinese government has it’s not that you wake up every morning with all my God with my standard of living collapse in with the US economy fall apart it’s really weird I don’t understand it. Well, I think the in the initial motivation we also a little bit based on  the more time and then you’re actually with couldn’t go on forever to make a public prediction. If something is it gonna go on forever and it seems to keep going on long past appointments and it would kind of get interested in going forever. China cannot reduce the amount of financing that it provides the United States without inducing. A slow down in the US economy is slow down or fall in the US purposes of Chinese good you were Chinese exports, and I think that is a very important consideration that way, he’s very heavily on Chinese parsley make it for China isn’t providing all this financing to the US , is it Mugsy states do they want us to hack delivery honor means that an explicit gold they want interest rates low in America so that I spend more on my credit card and I buy more Chinese stuff if you ask Chyn is Lita’s do they want the rest of it be on this means I think it  was a no that is building up dollars cast of windows dollars out and if you were need someone who needs tomorrow otherwise I need to be someone in the US is living beyond their means in order to keep her demand for Chinese goods going so in that says the indirect fat policy has been to encourage the US  S means stated goal and it’s good for them. Good for them good for us a different interest inside change the different interests inside the US it is good for the US treasury if China buys a ton of treasury bond that keeps interest rates low It is bad for workers in Ohio producing goods that compete with Chinese goods if Chyn is holding his currency down and taking marketshare away from the same thing works in the opposite way and sunshine. It’s good for Chinese explorers it’s good for workers in the export sector , but it isn’t good for Chinese taxpayers cause I’m gonna be taking a walk. Is it good for the workers who could be employed building schools in China China couldn’t buy a Biltmore of if it borrowed more money at the government level in Veteran winning it to US use that borrowing to buy the Billboard schools domestically  so their choices in those choices have different affects on different groups and it’s very hard to say the say, one side wins, the other side, loses anymore different parts of the two economies are impacted in different ways so trying to Alex a new leader tomorrow he doesn’t care about financial stability. He doesn’t care about his own economy. He’s just hell-bent on using whatever power he can to destroy America now if Robert Mugabe decided that I think it’s safe to swim, Zimbabwe does not have the ability to destroy the US economy trip , Hugo Chavez could call Gladys Rupšienė but couldn’t destroyer what would try to do let’s just say they hired use of Brad can you destroy the Earth economy for us? I can’t destroy the US economy I can cause a lot of damage to the US federal system and I would say you have a very simple option if you want to cause a great deal of disruption to the US financial system to the US government bond market, and buy application . Just have to stop buying a single new US government or USA if this stops if the unsustainable is no longer sustained of trying to stop buying US debt total class of capitalism great depression in late 70s kind of slow down malaise early 2000 reefer session that doesn’t hurt I mean where we’re at on that continuum more late 70s and collapse of capitalism  unemployment goes up an appointment already going up appointment goes off my walk more in America steals. Poor America hast to live with this means were you still in the beyond our means borrow as housing prices go down broad there’s your new cool things like I pause. Well, you are a new cool things I get to buy fuel you get to buy you were new things and those cool new things cost a little bit more right there the iPod may not be manufactured in China may not use designed in California manufactured in China famously well maybe it’ll be designed in California manufactured half an accident happen in California in Kost twice as much exaggerate a little bit , but so there will be some people will benefit from there be certain kinds of jobs will grow in the US maybe absolutely I mean, as you said before the people who are hurt now will no longer be hurt, and the people who win in one won’t win, but it’s the shift between the two time it takes effort factory doesn’t just spring up magically. There’s an interesting story about her business week about a young American inventor. Dad created a better battery for laptops, and they wanted to find out through technology  manufacturer in the US to build this new battery pack. OK I’ll shipping costs are gone way way way up there’s actually not that strong a reason to have this inside a low cost but there wasn’t any contract manufactured in the US with building batteries takes a while to build up the skills. Where is in China there a time it doesn’t wears in China Dyme-A-Duzin, so it is the difficulties in the air by contrast know we had to specialist here in the US economy who could take a mortgage with really complicated features reverse amortization very name  package it with other mortgage and very complicated features combine it into a bond combine that with that bond in the different parts come on those parts into another bond and sell it took out lotta work. It didn’t turn out to be quite put it it it was a saddle skills which wouldn’t be present in China so there’s a the process of changing the way what an economy produces takes time and there’s also the effect , and for that’s probably good in a long-term sense would be so pretty crappy not absolute misery it’s kind of yeah I’m I’m not on the coral doing gloom side of the spectrum, but at the same time it is I would much rather see a process by which there’s a  gradual reduction in China’s reliance on the US and Europe for demand for its products, much more reliance on internal forces, and a gradual process, where the US moves from a world where, in order to keep running a large trade deficit. Just keep borrowing marks on from the government to a world where trader from  a smaller and that trade us by sely private investors but I want that process it happen gradually suddenly suddenly are you cutting unpleasant and it’s noches unpleasant if somethings in efficient because economy cat shit from manufacturing mortgages to manufacturing laptop, batteries overnight slow basis of your investment in new factories other services Ron comes online as the sectors of the benefit from strong Chinese demand for dad  thank you for listening to the very first planet money podcast. We have a lot more information about Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac and China and everything that we talk about here on our website including some links to articles by Brad that’s npr.org/economy oh also please do send us your questions and your comments and your ideas for future podcasts or stories to global economy at npr.org. That’s one word or thoughts or anything global economy at npr.org. One thing please do let me know how I did in this podcast did did did I make things clear? Did you understand it? Was it interesting? What could’ve been better I really wanna make this work for for you so I would genuinely love to know  hopefully I’ll be reasonably polite but you can give me real constructive criticism Michael global economy at npr.org I am Adam Davidson, NPR news.

----

Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac is essential on recycling debt. US buy from China, China lend the dollar. 

but they don't want dollar, they want renmenbi. 
factory bring to bank,
bank go to central bank
central bank have dollar 
central bank want investment that save
first safest, goverment bond is not enough. 
Second best thing is Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac bond that backed by home mortgages

american buy and return as mortgages

US doesn't sell directly to central bank in china, to brokerage, jp morgan, to financial center in london, then to central bank china. 

China doesn't know. 
End of business day is london market time.
Relatively poor country, financing richer country.
China can't reduce financial role. China doesn't produce financial 
Different part of economy affected different way, central bank or producer on either side of country.
If China stop buying US debts, more late 70's. Unemployment goes up. 
The shift doesn't go instantly.

Manufacture want to make battery in US, can't find. But a lot in China
US have skill to create complex financial product.
 
